Indonesian 
Environmental Figures
How to save the earth?
KEMENTERIAN PENDIDIKAN, KEBUDAYAAN, RISET, DAN TEKNOLOGI
REPUBLIK INDONESIA, 2022
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Penulis: Puji Astuti, dkk.
ISBN: 978-602-427-944-8 (jil.2)
Unit
Unit 
4
138
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Mind Mapping the Unit
Indonesian 
Environmental 
Figures
Unit 4
Grammar
Simple  
Past Tense
Writing and Presenting
producing a narrative essay 
and presenting a digitally 
poster
Listening  
and Speaking
identifying and using 
the comparative and 
superlative in the 
monologues
Reading  
and Viewing
identifying main idea, 
author’s purpose, and 
core information
Pronunciation
grammatical  
function of  
intonation
Vocabulary
words related to 
environmental 
preservation
S+V
[a']
A
B
C
• 
Environment
• 
Environmental 
igure/activist
• 
Deforestation 
• 
Sustainable
• 
Climate
• 
Pollution
• 
Campaign
• 
Rubbish
• 
Volunteer
• 
Narrative
Keywords
Text type
transactional 
conversation, 
narrative text
Aa
Bb
139
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
Listening
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to correctly identify expressions 
for starting, continuing, and ending a transactional conversation. 
 
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 
 Work in pairs. Look at the 
picture, then discuss it by using 
Think-Pair-Share. Your teacher 
will explain the steps. 
Imagine you are the brother. 
What is your answer if your 
sister asked you the question?
Activity 2
 Work in pairs. Do the activity through Pairs Compare. Based on 
the picture in activity 1, are you concerned about the environment 
around you? Share what you are concerned about and why.
Picture 4.1 Watching TV
140
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Modeling of Text
Activity 3a
 Work Individually. Learn the  examples of expressions for starting, 
continuing, and ending a transactional conversation.
Table 4.1 Expressions for starting, continuing, and ending  
a transactional conversation
Starting
Continuing 
Ending
● 
What’s new?
● 
So, how have 
you been?
● 
What have you 
been up to?
● 
Keeping busy?
● 
How was your 
weekend?
● 
Do you have 
any plans for 
the weekend?
● 
So, how’s it 
going with 
(a project, 
initiative, 
etc.)…?
● 
So, what do 
you think 
about.…?
● 
So, did you 
hear that…?
● 
So, I heard 
that you are/
you’re…?
● 
Before I forget, I 
wanted to talk to 
you about…
● 
By the way…
● 
Since you’re here, 
let me ask you 
about…
● 
I actually wanted 
to talk to you 
about… Do 
you have a few 
minutes?
● 
While I have you 
on the line, let me 
ask you about… 
(if speaking on 
the phone)
● 
Ending small talk 
and starting a 
meeting:
● 
Well, let’s get 
started…
● 
Shall we talk 
about…?
● 
Anyway, let’s talk 
about …
● 
I should get going. 
It was nice talking 
to you.
● 
Well, I have to go. 
It was nice talking 
to you.
● 
Well, it was nice 
seeing you. Say 
hello to (name) for 
me.
● 
Well, I have a class 
in a few minutes. I 
better get going.
● 
Okay, I’ll talk 
with my team 
and I’ll give you 
a call tomorrow 
morning.
● 
So, we’ll wait for 
Joanna’s response 
and then go from 
there.
● 
Okay, I’ll work 
on the proposal 
and send it to you 
by the end of the 
week.
Source: Business English Resources, n.d.
141
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
Activity 3b
A
 Work individually. Listen to the dialogue carefully.
 
 
 
Picture 4.2 The students are watching video from a cell phone
Activity 3c
A
Identify the expressions for starting, continuing and ending a 
transactional conversation in the dialogue, underline the correct 
categories of the expression. 
Number 1 has been done for you. 
No. Expression 
Starting/Stating/Concluding
1
Hi, Keeping busy?
Starting/Continuing/Ending
2
By the way, what has she done
Starting/Continuing/Ending
3
It’s time to go back to class. Lets go!
Starting/Continuing/Ending
142
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 4
Listen to the audio carefully. The audio will be played twice. Mark 
whether the statements are True (T) or False (F).
Number 1 has been done for you.
Picture 4.3 Aeshnina Azzahra
Source: Screenshot of IG/@aeshnina (2021)
No.
Statements
True (T)/
False (F)
1.
The fun thing is that Nina participated in a 
demonstration in kindergarten.
F
2.
Nina is dealing with polluting waste in the 
mountain.
3.
Nina’s daily habits are very connected with the 
environment.
4.
Teacher teaches Nina to reduce single-use plastic. 
5.
Developed countries are mad for what Nina has 
done. 
143
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
Activity 5
 
Listen to the audio and complete this narrative essay with the phrases 
in the box. You can ind it through the link or QR code on page 266.
Number 1 has been done for you.
river warriors;     ecological activists;     smuggling plastic waste here; 
 
 
 
throwing garbage;      producer of plastic waste
Did you know that waste in Indonesia has become a serious issue? Of all 
countries globally, Indonesia is the third-largest (1) producer of plastic 
waste every day.
Seeing this sad condition, many people care about the environment 
and are passionate about ighting this problem to get the world’s 
attention. One of the so-called (2) __________ is Aeshnina Azzahra Aqilani, 
or Nina.
This little hero from Gresik is active in dealing with polluting 
waste in the river. Still, she has also made Germany aware to stop 
(3)_____________ in our country. She was even invited to the Netherlands 
to see irsthand how Europeans process their waste.
First, Nina was interested in the environmental world when she 
was little. Nina’s parents are also (4)__________ and researchers, so Nina 
always accompanied them to rivers, beaches, and forests.
The fun thing is that Nina also participated in a demonstration 
in kindergarten. So Nina’s daily habits are very connected with the 
environment. Moms and Dads also always teach Nina to reduce single-
use plastic as much as possible and tell her how important the river is.
Developed countries such as Germany and the United States often 
send garbage to our country. Nina sent a letter to the German Chancellor 
with the intention that they stop (5)__________________.
The response was incredible! Nina managed to meet the ambassador 
in Jakarta, and they promised to tighten supervision at the port. Well, 
plastic waste from Germany has also decreased rapidly.
Source: (Hearth of Justice, n.d.)
144
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 6
 Work in pairs. Identify the expressions for  starting, continuing, 
and ending conversation from the audio. 
Number 1 has been done for you.
No.
Statement 
Expression
1.
Did you know that waste in Indonesia has 
become a serious issue?
starting
2.
3.
4.
Write down what you have learned so far in this session. Which 
expressions for starting, continuing and ending conversation that 
you often use in your daily life conversation?
What Have You Learned So Far?
Once you realize that caring for the environment is very important, 
what will you do for the environment around you?
A Mid-Lesson Relection
145
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 7
 Work in groups of four. Watch the video then 
ind starting, continuing, and ending conversation 
expressions. Scan the following QR Code or visit the link 
to watch the video: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FMJhKQjO5uk&t=6s. 
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 8
 Work individually. Watch the video. Find 
expressions for starting, continuing and ending 
conversation in the video. Scan the following QR Code 
or visit the link to watch the video: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e6rglsLy1Ys. 
Linking Related Texts
Nina  is only one of many others who keep our environment safe and 
healthy. Find your local environmental igure who makes you amazed 
by what he/she has done to the environment.
Speaking
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to use expressions for starting, 
continuing, and ending a transactional conversation with the correct 
use of intonation.
146
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Building Knowledge of the Field
 
 
 
  Picture 4.4 Pak Sadiman
Activity 1a
 This is individual work. Look at the illustration about Pak Sadiman, 
an environmental igure from Wonogiri, Central Java, Indonesia. What 
is your irst impression of him? Write your answer in your notebook.
Activity 1b
Your teacher will play a video about Pak Sadiman. Follow the instructions. 
 Individual Work:
1. Watch the video carefully, speciically from minute 2:00 to 7:00. 
2. Watch it for the second time and take some notes if needed. You will 
ind the notes helpful. 
 Group Work: 
1. Work in groups of three. 
2. Together with your group members, recall the expressions for 
starting, continuing, and ending a transactional conversation that 
you learned in the last Listening Lesson. 
147
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
4. Prepare for a conversation with your group members about Pak 
Sadiman. Focus on why he is labeled as “insane” by some people 
around him. 
5. Make use of your notes. 
6. Decide who will do the starting, continuing, and concluding part of 
your conversation.
7. Do the prepared conversation in front of another group and/or to 
the whole class. 
Modeling of Text
Activity 2
One more time, recall all of the expressions for starting, continuing, and 
ending a transactional conversation you have learned so far. Next, work 
in groups of ive through Numbered-Head Together (NHT) in which 
you will answer your teacher’s questions regarding their categories, 
such as: Which category of expression is this one: Shall we talk about…? 
Your teacher will give you complete guidance for doing the NHT. 
Activity 3
Carefully read the following materials about intonation. 
The Grammatical Function of Intonation in English
There are some intonation patterns in English, which, for the most 
part, correspond to the use of particular grammar structures. The 
most common example is in the use of wh-questions (questions 
beginning with ‘who’, ‘what’, ‘why’, ‘where’, ‘when’, ‘which’, and 
‘how’), which usually have a falling intonation.
In a conversation with a new classmate, the following questions 
would sound most natural with falling intonation: ‘What’s your 
name?’, ‘Where are you from?’, ‘Why did you choose this school?’, 
‘How long will you study here?’.
148
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Questions that require a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answer, however, usually 
have upward intonation. In the same conversation with your 
classmate, your voice would rise at the end when asking the following 
questions: ‘Have you studied here before?’, ‘Do you like the teacher?’, 
‘Will you come back tomorrow?’.
Source: Muniem, 2015
Activity 4
 This is individual work. Follow the instruction:
1. Based on the above materials, complete the following table in which 
you write one (1) expression for each category (starting/continuing/
ending).
2. Recall the learning materials from the last Listening Lesson: 
Modeling of Text and indicate the correct intonation (falling/
upward) for each of the expressions. Use a check mark to do so. One 
is done for you as an example:
Falling 
Intonation
Upward 
Intonation
Starting: What’s new?
(one expression)
3
Starting: …………………
(one expression)
Continuing: …………………….
(one expression)
Ending: …………………….
(one expression)
149
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
Activity 5
 Work in groups of ive. Through RoundRobin, take turns to 
pronounce each of the expressions you have in the table above with the 
correct intonation. Start with one category of expression followed by 
the next until all categories are covered.  
In the space provided, write one expression that you like the most 
from each category (for starting, continuing, and ending).
1.
2.
3.
What Have You Learned So Far?
 
From all of the activities that you have done previously, which 
activity do you think is challenging? Do you like to work individually 
or in pairs? Write your answer in the space provided!
Name/Class:
Answer:
A Mid-Lesson Relection
150
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 6
 Work in groups of three. Based on the following situation and   with 
the correct use of intonation, use the three categories of expressions in 
a transactional conversation between three students. When your group 
is ready, perform the conversation in front of a neighboring group or in 
front of the classroom. Listen to the feedback given by your peers and 
teacher about your performance.
Situation: The three of you are members of a committee of Environmental 
Awards for the upcoming International Earth Day celebration at school. 
Discuss the criteria to select students who deserve the awards. Use the 
three categories of expressions in your conversation. Also, pay attention 
to your intonation; use the correct one. 
Activity 7
 This is individual work. Follow the instructions:
1. Answer the following questions: 1) What do you think of your group 
members’ use of intonation during the conversation? and 2) What 
suggestions do you have for them regarding their intonation? 
2. Share your answers with your group members. 
3. Ask them to do the same for you.  
 
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 8
The instructions for this activity are the same as the ones for Activity 6 
but with a different situation. 
Situation: The committee of the Environmental Awards for the 
International Earth Day celebration has announced three students 
who received the awards. Each of you has a favorite one. Talk about it. 
Use the three categories of expressions in your conversation. Also, pay 
attention to your intonation; use the correct one. 
151
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
Linking Related Texts
How do the learning materials in this Speaking Lesson (i.e., expressions 
for starting, continuing, and ending a transactional conversation) 
relate to the organization of an essay (opening, main, and concluding 
paragraphs)? Think about them and read relevant sources to answer 
the question. Write the answer in your notebook. 
Reading
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to correctly identify the main 
ideas and author’s purpose in a narrative text.
 
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 Work in groups of four. Look at the people in the pictures. Guess 
who they are and what they do to our earth. 
 
 
  Picture 4.5 In the classroom
152
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 2
 Work in pairs. Look at the table. There is a clue on the left and 
you have to guess who she/he is. All of them are young Indonesian 
environmental activists. Discuss with your partner to get the answer. 
Number 1 has been done for you.
1.
They began a campaign to rid Bali of 
single-use plastic bags titled Bye Bye 
Plastics Bags.
Melati and Isabel 
Wijsen
2.
She co-founded the youth organization, 
which aims to counter deforestation and 
act as an advocate for the environment in 
Indonesia.
3.
She is a young environmental activist. She 
irst volunteered in a community project 
to clean the Ciliwung River in Bogor with 
a respected climate activist, Hapsoro.
4.
He is a boy from Tapanuli, North 
Sumatra and he was selected as one of 
the Indonesian delegates of the UN Youth 
Climate Summit. 
Activity 3
In order to help you understand a narrative essay entitled “Laetnia 
Belai Djandam”, let’s learn the vocabulary that you will ind in it.
Environmentalist
one concerned about environmental quality 
especially of the human environment with 
respect to the control of pollution
Climate
the composite or generally prevailing weather 
conditions of a region, as temperature, air
153
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
pressure, humidity, precipitation, sunshine, 
cloudiness, and winds, throughout the year, 
averaged over a series of years.
Reuse
the act or process of using again
Sustainable 
pertaining to a system that maintains its own 
viability by using techniques that allow for 
continual reuse:
Environment
Ecology. the air, water, minerals, organisms, 
and all other external factors surrounding and 
affecting a given organism at any time.
Source: (Cambridge Dictionary, n.d.; Merriam Webster, n.d.)
Modeling of Text
Activity 4a
In this section you will relearn how to identify the main idea  in a 
paragraph. Recall the information about this in unit 3 (page 115). In 
addition, you also have to recall the information about the author’s 
purpose that has been studied in unit 1 (page 17). Study those two pieces 
of information as a guide to do the next activity.
Activity 4b
 Work individually. Read a narrative essay entitled “Laetnia Belai 
Djandam” and answer the questions.
Laetania Belai Djandam
Laetania Belai Djandam, she is a young environmentalist, her 
age is 19 years old. She is a Health and Human Sciences student 
at the University of Sheield in the UK and an Indonesian youth 
environmental activist. She felt lucky to be raised in a family that
154
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
values the integrity of nature and 
is environmentally conscious 
and active. Because of this, 
she has been exposed to and 
involved in climate action from 
quite a young age. Growing up in 
that space has inspired her to do 
as much as she can for the Earth 
and its people.
Descending from the Dayak 
people of Borneo, she is also   
passionate in supporting the development of local and customary 
communities in Kalimantan, Indonesia. She is especially interested 
in helping to build their adaptive capacity in facing both health 
and environmental crises. Her parents have always been involved 
in working with communities in Indonesia and their environment, 
so she grew up with an understanding that these are two important 
things to protect and support.
She was only seven years old when she irst volunteered in 
a community project to clean the Ciliwung River in Bogor with a 
respected climate activist, Hapsoro. Nine years old when she felt 
proud to go on a ield trip with her classmates and teacher to visit her 
mom’s oice and learn about her work in forestry. Twelve when she 
was one of the chosen students in my elementary school to feature in 
a television series about recycling waste.
Her interest in environmental causes sparked from a very young 
age, but she relied more on taking opportunities that came her way, 
rather than creating them myself.
She believes everybody deserves to live a healthy, happy life. “As a 
health student, I want to give people the opportunity to make healthy 
choices and have healthy lives.” And as a young environmentalist, 
she wants to ensure that people have equal access to a clean and 
sustainable home.
Picture 4.6 Laetania Belai Djandam
155
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
As a Planetary Health learner, she understands that it should 
not be a choice between the two. There is an underlying connection 
between human and environmental health, where if one is not healthy 
then neither can be. We need to be illuminating these connections 
between health and the environment because the solution lies in the 
heart of where the two meet.
Source:  Schmidt, n.d.
1. What is the main idea of paragraph 1? 
2. What does paragraph 2 talk about? 
3. What makes Laetania grow up with an understanding that 
environment and health are important? 
4. What does Laetania want to protect? 
5. What is the author’s purpose in writing this text? 
Activity 5
 Work in a group of four. Match the paragraph number on the left 
column with its main idea on the right column. 
Paragraph
Main Idea
Paragraph 1
a) She comes from Dayak people who concern in 
helping to build their adaptive capacity in facing 
both health and environmental crises
Paragraph 2
b) She was very young when she irst volunteered.
Paragraph 3
c) There is a connection between human and 
environmental health.
Paragraph 4
d) She wants to ensure that people have equal access 
to a clean and sustainable home.
Paragraph 5
e) She was clever in taking opportunities that came 
to her.
156
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Paragraph 6
f) 
Laetania Belai Djandam is a youth environmental 
activist Because of this, she has been exposed to 
and involved in climate action from quite a young 
age.
You have studied narrative essays in this  lesson. Write down what 
must be considered in writing a narrative essay.
What Have You Learned So Far?
In your opinion, what activities can be done to preserve the 
environment. Then, what would happen if no one cared about 
preserving the environment anymore?
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 6
 Work in groups of four. Read a narrative essay entitled Salsabila 
Khairunnisa. Find the mind idea of each paragraph, then decide the 
author’s purpose. Your teacher will give you further explanation on 
how to answer the questions.
157
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
Salsabila Khairunnisa
Salsabila Khairunnisa was born in 2003 is 
an Indonesian environmental activist. Aged 
15, she co-founded The Jaga Rimba youth 
movement which aims to ight deforestation 
and exploitation in Indonesia. In 2020, she was 
nominated to be one of the BBC’s 100 Women 
Award.
Jaga Rimba is closely connected to the 
community who lived at Laman Kinipan, who 
was evicted from the village in 2018 by a palm 
oil company. The business PT Sawit Mandiri  
Lestari (SML) claimed they had the right to use the land in the 
community to grow palm. They evicted the villagers, resulting in 
famine, as well as affecting the community of orangutans who lived 
in the area. Jaga Rimba campaigns to ensure that the indigenous 
people of the Kinipan Forest, one of Borneo’s last rainforests, not to 
lose their land.
Khairunnisa, who is inspired by other climate activists such as 
Sweden’s Greta Thunberg and Mitzi Jonelle Tan from the Philippines, 
said Jaga Rimba has advised student campaigns against deforestation 
on Sumatra island, in Kalimantan and Indonesia’s easternmost 
region of Papua. Recent campaigns have targeted Indonesia’s plans 
to develop a giant farm on Borneo island to avoid food shortages, and 
a job creation bill passed by parliament in October that critics say 
could weaken environmental standards. Khairunnisa is increasingly 
being recognized for her climate activism and last month was listed 
as one of the BBC’s 100 inspiring and inluential women for 2020.
The pandemic has given us a collective awareness that we 
are all under the same capitalist and patriarchal system that 
bases its existence on proit. It is time to unite in solidarity, and 
lead a green and just recovery.
 For her, rainforests not only play an important role for 
biodiversity and tackling climate change, but also “connect us 
with our ancestors and identity”, she said.
Source: BBC News Indonesia, n.d.
Picture 4.7 Salsabila 
Khairunnisa
Source: Pejuang iklim (2021)
158
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 7
 Work in pairs. Do Jigsaw Reading. Read the following narrative 
text. Find the main idea and the author’s purpose.
Aeshnina Azzahra Aqilani
Did you know that waste in Indonesia 
has become a serious issue? Of all 
countries globally, Indonesia is the 
third-largest producer of plastic waste 
every day.
Seeing this sad condition, many 
people care about the environment 
and are passionate about ighting this 
problem to get the world’s attention. 
One of the so-called river warriors is 
Aeshnina Azzahra Aqilani, or Nina.
This little hero from Gresik is active in dealing with polluting waste 
in the river. Still, she has also made Germany aware to stop throwing 
garbage in our country. He was even invited to the Netherlands to see 
irsthand how Europeans process their waste.
First, Nina was interested in the environmental world when she 
was little. Nina’s parents are also ecological activists and researchers, 
so Nina always accompanied them to rivers, beaches, and forests.
The fun thing is that Nina also participated in a demonstration 
in kindergarten. So Nina’s daily habits are very connected with the 
environment. Moms & Dads also always teach Nina to reduce single-
use plastic as much as possible and tell her how important the river is.
Developed countries such as Germany and the United States 
often send garbage to our country. Nina sent a letter to the German 
Chancellor with the intention that they stop smuggling plastic waste 
here.
Picture 4.8 Aeshnina Azzahra
Source: screenshot of IG/@aeshnina 
(2021)
159
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
The response was incredible! Nina managed to meet the 
ambassador in Jakarta, and they promised to tighten supervision at 
the port. Now plastic waste from Germany has also decreased rapidly.
Source: Hearth of Justice, n.d.
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 8
 Work individually. Read a narrative essay about Tasya Kamila. 
Find the main idea for each paragraph and the author’s purpose. 
Tasya Kamila
Many people don’t know that Tasya Kamila 
has a foundation engaged in environmental 
education. The foundation is called green-
house, which was established to focus on 
increasing young people’s awareness and 
participation regarding the environment. 
She believes that the help of greenhouse 
facilities that Suntory Garuda Beverage 
has provided will allow children to learn 
and practice directly in the ield, or in other 
words, ‘learning by doing.
In this instantaneous age, the level of children’s concern for the 
environment is decreasing. If assisted by adequate facilities, children 
can learn and see what cannot complete the process of preserving the 
environment in a short time.
Therefore, the provision of kid-friendly environmental conservation 
facilities allows them to learn the latest techniques and technologies 
in farming, and they can also have the opportunity to grow their 
respective crops in their school environment.
Picture 4.9 Tasya Kamila
Source: Screenshot of IG/ 
@tasyakamila (2021)
160
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
“Socialization and education are the most important highlights in 
young people’s efforts to conserve the environment. If it is not carried 
out in a fun way, this environmental conservation activity will not 
achieve maximum results,” concluded Tasya.
He emphasized that we all have an obligation and mandate 
to preserve the environment and the earth for the lives of future 
generations. Therefore, he hopes that the efforts and initial steps that 
have been made can produce a more sustainable environment in the 
future.
Source: Fimela, n.d.
Linking Related Texts
Search from the internet a video for an outstanding young activist. 
Write three things about him/her that make you amazed.
Viewing
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to correctly synthesize and 
evaluate detailed information in a narrative text.
161
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
 
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 Work in pairs. Look at the following picture. Answer and discuss 
the questions about it with your partner.
 
 
 
    Picture 4.10 A Granny plants some trees
1. What is the old woman doing?
 
2. Why do you think she is doing that?
 
Activity 2
 Work in a group of four. Do Three-Step-Interview. Watch the 
video about Pak Sadiman that your teacher will show you. Ask the 
following questions to your partner. Do it in turn. Your teacher will 
explain how to do it.
1. What characteristics does Pak Sadiman have?
 
2. If you were him, would you do the same thing? Why?
 
162
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Modeling of Text
Activity 3a
 Work individually and study the following narrative text about 
healthy living.
An Inspiring Story of Healthy Living
By Megan Carolin, Member of the Birmingham Family YMCA
My weight loss journey began in June 2013. I was 311 pounds at 25 
years old. I was experiencing headaches, dizziness, heart palpitations 
and general discomfort. My day-to-day life was fairly miserable. 
I was slow to move, often feeling run down and sick. Every day when 
I got home from work, I immediately went to lay down because I was 
so tired.
My eating habits at the time were very poor. I was basically living 
off of fast food and microwave meals. When I did cook, it was large 
portions of pasta. I was not exercising other than the occasional walk 
around the block.
One night, I felt so dizzy and had such a severe headache that I 
contemplated driving to the ER. I thought something must be seriously 
wrong. I called my parents in a panic, and my dad came to pick me 
up. When I got to their house, the three of us had a discussion about 
my weight. I was right: something WAS seriously wrong, and that 
was my weight.
Although my parents and I had similar conversations in the 
past, this time was different. This time I decided I really did want 
to change. I no longer wanted to feel miserable and uncomfortable. 
I wanted to live freely, healthy and happy.
I met with my doctor who ran a series of blood tests and determined 
that I was at a high risk for diabetes, my vitamin D level was severely 
low, and my cholesterol level was too high. She recommended that I 
join a gym to get a kick start on my exercise. I joined a gym that was 
close to work so that I could go in the mornings. I started slowly… 
when I irst joined the gym I could only do 3 minutes on the elliptical.
163
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
I also started to count my calories and watch my portion sizes, carbs, 
and sodium. By February, I had lost about 40 pounds.
In February 2014 I had to change jobs, and with that I had to change 
gyms. After looking at several gyms in the area, I decided to join the 
Birmingham YMCA. The staff was friendly and knowledgeable. I met 
with a personal trainer on one of my irst visits and explained my 
weight loss journey so far. She recommended different exercises and 
classes for me to do. The Y is where I fell in love with group exercises 
classes. Previously, I had been too afraid to go to classes, worried 
that my weight would set me apart from other class members and 
that I wouldn’t be able to keep up. But the Y has helped me to gain 
conidence, and I’ve done Zumba, Cardio Sculpt, Pilates, Bootcamp 
and Kickboxing classes. Kickboxing is my absolute favorite workout. 
Each of the trainers at the Y have really embraced me and helped me 
to become stronger, more it and more conident.
I continue to count my calories and am careful about what I eat. 
I cook nearly every night and plan all of my meals. It takes time, but 
it’s worth it.
I have lost a total of 90 lbs and I am down 5 pant sizes. Although 
it has taken me a while, I am so proud of what I have been able to 
accomplish. I have hit many plateaus along the way that have stalled 
my progress, but the trainers at the Y are always available for me 
to talk to and to learn from to get through the plateaus. They push 
me but they do not judge me. They encourage me and support me. 
I also love working out with other members at the Y and being able 
to encourage each other through our journeys. I feel comfortable at 
the Y, I feel at home.
When I run into someone I haven’t seen in a while, one of their 
irst comments is not necessarily about my weight itself, but they 
say “you look so much taller!” Previously, I was almost constantly 
hunched over. It was diicult to carry all that weight around, and 
even more diicult to do it with conidence. But now, I am not only 
leaner and able to carry myself stronger and taller, but I am more 
conident and happy with my body. That change has made all the 
difference.
Taken from An inspiring story of healthy living – YMCA of Metropolitan Detroit (ymcadetroit.org)
164
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 3b
 Work individually. Study the following WH questions to do activity 4.
Picture 4.11 WH Question Thinking cloud
Activity 4
 Work in pairs. Write a sentence for each WH question. Examples 
are given for you.
Who 
: Who plants the trees on the hill?
What : What makes Pak Sadiman happy?
Where : Where is pak Sadiman from?
When : When does he leave the house?
Why 
: Why is Pak Sadiman planting the tree?
Which : Which tree is planted by pak Sadiman?
1. Who 
: 
2. What : 
3. What : 
4. Where : 
5. When : 
6. Which : 
165
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
After learning and understanding about the use of WH questions, 
write down three questions about pak Sadiman using the WH 
questions that you have learned.
1. 
2. 
3. 
What Have You Learned So Far?
Pak Sadiman has been planting a lot of trees to keep the Earth 
green. How about you? What can you do to make your environment 
green?
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 5
 Work in pairs. Look at the following picture about different ways to 
go green. Pick three ways that you can do and explain how you can do that. 
Take turns to explain your answer to other pairs in the class.
 
 
 
    Picture 4.12 Five ways to go green
166
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 5
 Work individually. Find another way that you can do to go green 
that is not included in the picture in activity 5. Make a poster that 
includes a picture and explanation of it. You may create the poster 
using a digital application or simply create it without any digital tools.
Linking Related Texts
 Work individually. There are some other people besides Pak 
Sadiman who care about the environment. Find one from the internet. 
Write short information about him or her in an infographic. Don’t forget 
to attach his or her pictures. If there is no internet access, you may ind 
it from the library or choose someone from your neighborhood that has 
the same role as Pak Sadiman.
167
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
Picture 4.14  
Picture 4.14  
Young 
Young 
environmental 
environmental 
activists
activists
Writing
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to write a linear narrative text 
about an environmental igure using simple past tense correctly.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1a
Look at the following picture of two young environmental activists 
from Bali.
Picture 4.13 Isabel Wijsen (left) & Melati Wijsen (right)
Source: highend/Clara E.B Sagala (2021)
Next, check the following picture that captures one of their contributions 
to our environment.
168
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 1b
 Work individually. Answer the following questions:
1. Have you ever heard about Melati and Isabel Wijsen? 
2. What did you hear about them?
3. Do you know other young environmental igures from Indonesia?
4. What are their contributions to our environment?
5. What have you done so far for our environment? 
Activity 2
 Now, work in pairs. Through Think-Pair-Share, share your 
answers with your partner.
Modeling of Text
Activity 3a
Read the following materials about linear narrative text and the type of 
tense used in it: past tense, speciically simple past tense.
Linear Narrative Text
It presents events in the order they occurred. 
Source: Now Novel, n.d.
Narrative Tenses 
We use narrative tenses to talk about the past. We can use them to 
tell a story or to describe past events, including personal anecdotes.
The four narrative tenses are the past simple [simple past tense], 
past continuous, past perfect and past perfect continuous and one 
or more of these can be used in a sentence.
169
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
Simple Past Tense
We can use simple past tense for actions that started and inished in 
the past, for example a series of events in someone’s life.
Nelson Mandela was born in 1918. He became the irst black 
President of South Africa. He spent 27 years in prison in his battle 
against the system of apartheid. 
Source: BBC Learning English, n.d.
Activity 3b
After reading the above materials, ask your teacher if you have any 
questions or need an explanation regarding the text type and its tense.
Activity 4
 This is individual work. Read the following narrative text about 
Melati and Isabel Wijsen.
This pair of sisters from Bali is known as climate activists in Indonesia. 
Since 2013, Melati and Isabel have carried out many campaigns to 
reduce plastic waste on the island. One of them is the Bye Bye Plastic 
Bag campaign which is the key to getting rid of plastic bags in Bali. In 
practice, they had to go on a hunger strike for 1 day in order to meet 
the governor of Bali at the time, I Made Mangku Pastika. Thanks to 
this action, Pastika signed a warrant prohibiting the use of styrofoam, 
plastic bags, and straws in Bali effective 2018.
In 2018, these Indonesian-Dutch blooded sisters were included 
in the list of the 25 Most Inluential Teens of 2018 according to Time 
magazine. They also briely spoke at the United Nations World Ocean 
Day event in New York City, United States in 2017. Melati Wijsen’s 
contribution to environmental preservation was even shown in the 
documentary ilm Bigger than Us (2019), directed by Flore Vasseur 
and produced by Marion Cotillard.
Source: Think Conscious, 2021
170
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 5
 Work in pairs. Together with your partner, complete the following 
tables based on the above text. 
Events in Linear Narrative Text
Years
Events
Simple Past Tense in Linear Narrative Text
Regular Verbs
Irregular Verbs
Activity 6a
 Now, work individually. Create 
similar tables in your notebook and 
read the following narrative text about 
another 
Indonesian 
environmental 
igure, Swietenia Puspa Lestari (see her 
picture also on the side). Based on the 
text, complete the tables.
Picture 4.15 Swietenia Puspa Lestari
Source: Screenshot of IG @swieteniapuspa (2016)
171
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
Even though she is not a celebrity, Swietenia Puspa Lestari is an 
inspiring environmentalist and has many positive impacts on 
environmental sustainability. This Bogor Institute of Technology 
graduate focuses on tackling plastic waste in the ocean through an 
organization he founded with his partner, Divers Clean Action (DCA). 
The organization, which was founded in 2015, initially consisted 
of only three volunteers whose main activity was picking up trash 
in the sea. Currently, DCA has grown bigger with more than 1,500 
volunteers spread throughout Indonesia.
Not only at DCA, but Swietenia is also active in various 
environmental conservation activities. Starting from establishing the 
Indonesian Youth Marine Debris (2017), becoming a representative 
of Indonesia at the 2017 United Nations Climate Change Conference 
in Bonn, Germany, to helping the anti-plastic straw movement 
and successfully convincing 700 restaurants to reduce the use of 
single-use straws. She even had time to become one of the 100 most 
inluential and inspiring women in the world according to the BBC.
Source: Think Conscious, 2021
Activity 6b
 With your partner from Activity 5, compare the completed tables. 
With her/him, talk about: 
1) what’s meant by linear narrative text
2) how simple past tense (regular and irregular verbs) is used to write 
about past events/actions
In your notebook, write the answers to the following questions:
1. When do we need to write a linear narrative text?
2. Why is simple past tense important in a linear narrative text?
What Have You Learned So Far?
172
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Picture 4.16 Young environmentalists and their action
There are environmental problems that we face daily. Which 
problem do you think is pressing to solve in your neighborhood? 
According to environmental activists and experts, what are the 
solutions to the problem? Which solution is doable for you? When 
will you do it?
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 7
Picture 4.17 Farwiza Farhan
Source: DetikEdu/Farwiza Farhan, 2021
173
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
 Work in groups of four. Search for references about Farwiza 
Farhan (see her photo above), a female environmentalist from Aceh, 
Indonesia. You might also want to watch her interview (“Talkshow 
with Farwiza Farhan, Forest Under Female Conservationist” SEA Today 
News, n.d.). Use the two tables from Activity 5 to take notes. Next, write 
a two-paragraph linear narrative text about her. Make sure you use 
simple past tense to write about the past actions/events in her journey 
as an environmentalist.  Ask your teacher when you need help in the 
writing process.
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 8
 This is individual work. Follow the same steps as you took in 
Activity 7. This time your two-paragraph linear narrative text is about 
an Indonesian environmental igure of your choice. Remember to 
use simple past tense to write about the past actions/events in her/his 
journey in preserving our mother nature. 
Linking Related Texts
Activity 9
Do you remember Greta Thunberg (a Swedish environmental activist) 
whose picture is available in Unit 1? Read some online articles about 
her. Then, read more about one of the environmental igures showcased 
in this Writing Lesson. Next, answer the question: How was their strong 
determination in preserving nature formed?
Note: In a teaching context where the Internet connection is an issue, 
ask students to choose one of the Indonesian environmental igures 
that they think is the most inspiring along with their reasons.
174
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Presenting
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to suitably present a digitally 
or non-digitally designed poster about an environmental igure.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 Work individually. Read the following narrative essay on Xiye 
Bastida, an environmental igure.
Xiye Bastida | USA
“We are on Earth to take care of life. We are on Earth to take care of 
each other.”
Xiye Bastida is a teenage climate activist currently based in New 
York City and one of the lead organizers of the Fridays For Future 
youth climate strike movement.
Bastida was born in Atlacomulco, Mexico to parents Mindahi and 
Geraldine, who are also environmentalists, and raised in the town of 
San Pedro Tultepec in Lerma. Her father is of Otomi-Toltec descent 
while her Chilean mother has Celtic ancestry. Bastida currently holds 
dual Mexican and Chilean citizenship.
Bastida and her family moved to New York City after extreme 
looding hit their hometown of San Pedro Tultepec in 2015 following 
three years of drought.Bastida attended The Beacon School. She 
enrolled at the University of Pennsylvania in 2020.
Bastida began her activism with an environmental club. The club 
protested at Albany and New York City Hall and lobbied for the
175
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
the Climate and Community Leaders Protection Act (CLCPA) and the 
Dirty Buildings Bill. It was then she heard about Greta Thunberg and 
her climate strikes. Bastida gave a speech on Indigenous Cosmology 
at the 9th United Nations World Urban Forum, and was awarded the 
“Spirit of the UN” award in 2018.
Bastida led her high school, The Beacon School, in the irst major 
climate strike in New York City on 15 March 2019. She and Alexandria 
Villaseñor oicially greeted Thunberg upon her arrival from Europe 
by boat in September 2019 to attend the UN Climate Summit. Xiye 
has been coined “America’s Greta Thunberg” however has said 
that “calling youth activists the ‘Greta Thunberg’ of their country 
diminishes Greta’s personal experience and individual struggles”.
Teen Vogue released a documentary short We Rise on Bastida 
in December 2019. Bastida has also collaborated with 2040 ilm to 
create a short video titled Imagine the Future exploring what future 
landscapes and cityscapes could look like in the future.
Bastida contributed to All We Can Save, an anthology of women 
writing about climate change. She recently spoke at the Leadership 
Summit on Climate hosted by the Biden Administration, delivering a 
speech urging world leaders to participate more in climate activism.
Source: Earthday, n.d., Wikipedia, n.d.
Activity 2
 Work in pairs. Identify the information based on the structures of 
a narrative essay.
The Introduction : 
 
 
 
The Body 
: 
 
 
The Conclusion : 
 
 
176
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Modeling of Text
Activity 3
Read the following information in the table about guidelines to have a 
powerful presentation. Pay attention to the expressions  on every stage.
Table 4.2 Guidelines to Have a Powerful Presentation
No.
Stages
Expressions
1.
Greetings
Assalamualaikum/Good Morning, Ladies and 
Gentlemen. I would like to say thank you for 
coming to my presentation. It’s great to see 
you all. My name is ….
2.
Introducing 
the presenters
Let me introduce myself and my partners. I 
am …. and my partners are … We are from 
group 1.
3.
State the Focus 
of the Topic
On this occasion, I would like to present …
The purpose of my presentation is …
In this presentation, we will show you a 
poster about …
 
Please look at the picture. What do you see in 
the picture? Great. We will continue inding 
out what is going on there.
4.
Share the Main 
Content of the 
Presentation
First, I will explain why … is so important 
for us. Finally, you will know how to …
We will see how many actions to save the 
environment. We will show the details about 
it, but look at the poster irst.
5.
Question and 
Answer
Anybody would like to ask?
There will be questions and answers in this 
presentation.
Just feel free to interrupt me if you have 
something to ask.
177
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
You can freely ask questions about this 
presentation.
I will try to answer any questions you may 
have.
6.
Make a 
summary
In conclusion ….
In summary ….
So the points are ….
In short ….
To summarize ….
To sum up ….
To conclude ….
7.
Closing
Thank you very much for your great 
attention, ladies and gentlemen.
Thank you for your attention.
Thank you for listening. May all those we 
have shared bring beneits for all of us.
Source: Waters, n.d.
 Now. Work in pairs.
Suppose you are to deliver a presentation about a famous environmental 
igure. What would you say in the presentation?
Follow the guidelines to write your script.
No.
Stages
Expressions
 1.
 
 
 2.
 
 
178
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
 3.
 
 
 4.
 
 
 5.
 
 
 6.
 
 
 7.
 
 
In the box provided below, write ive (5) interesting things that you 
have learned in this section. Then, explain how they are relevant 
with you and your daily life.
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
What Have You Learned So Far?
179
Unit 4 Indonesian Environmental Figures
Write 3 ways or tips to be a good presenter.
1. 
2. 
3. 
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 4
 Work in a group of four. Create a digital or non digital poster on an 
environmental igure. Make sure that you have complete information 
about him or her.
Do Number Group Presentation to present your group’s poster.
Discuss the result of the presentation with your group.
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 5
 Work individually. 
Create a digital or non-digital poster of your future actions to save the 
environment.
Linking Related Texts
Activity 6
In this unit, you’ve already known tips to have a 
powerful presentation. Watch this video to deepen your 
understanding about an environmentalist presentation. 
Scan the following QR Code or visit the link to watch 
the video: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qXQtrvHqUAY
180
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
An End-of-Unit Relection
What I have learned from this unit:
The information I understand the most:
Information that I want to learn more:
My opinion about this unit:
