CEO
Artist
Researcher
Modern Farmer
Digital Literacies and 
My Identities
KEMENTERIAN PENDIDIKAN, KEBUDAYAAN, RISET, DAN TEKNOLOGI
REPUBLIK INDONESIA, 2022
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Penulis: Puji Astuti, dkk.
ISBN: 978-602-427-944-8 (jil.2)
How do digital literacies 
help shape my future 
identities?
Unit
Unit 
1
Mind Mapping the Unit
Digital 
Literacies 
and My 
Identities
Unit 1
Grammar
subject questions, 
transitional words for 
showing sequences
Writing and Presenting
1) subject questions in captions/posts 
2) drafts for social media posts,  
3) effective captions,  
4) social media post,  
5) transitional words and  
graphic organizer
Listening  
and Speaking
transactional 
conversation
Reading  
and Viewing
making inferences to 
comprehend implicit 
information
Text Type
transactional 
conversation, 
authentic text
• 
social 
interaction/
discussion
• 
digital literacies
• 
future identities
• 
word stress
• 
multimodal text
• 
authors/content 
creators’ 
purposes  
• 
implicit 
information
• 
inference
• 
subject question
• 
social media 
caption/post
• 
transitional 
words
• 
graphic 
organizer
Keywords
Vocabulary
words related to 
social media post, 
engagement, and 
interaction
S+V
A
B
C
Expressions
stating opinion, 
agreeing,  
disagreeing
Aa
Bb
Pronunciation
word stress
[a']
2
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Listening
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to correctly categorize 
expressions (stating opinions, agreeing, and disagreeing) used in a 
spoken transactional conversation that you listen to.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 
Look at each of the pictures. Answer the question: What are the people 
doing?
Picture 1.1  
Social  
interaction  
in daily life
3
 Work individually. Write your answer here. An example is given 
to you.
Example: The students are engaged in a conversation with their peers.
Picture 1 
Picture 2 
Picture 3 
 Next, work in pairs through Think-Pair-Share. Your teacher will 
explain how it works. 
Activity 2
 Work individually. In the following table, list down the top three 
reasons for having discussions in our day-to-day life. Completing the 
table will help you in the next activity.
Reason #1
Reason #2
Reason #3
Activity 3
 Now work in groups of four. Do RallyRobin. Your teacher will 
explain how it works. Before you start it, make sure you are ready to 
explain the above reasons to your partner. Listen to her/him, too.
4
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Modeling of Text
Activity 4
 
 Work individually. Carefully read the following materials. 
Expressions for Stating Opinion,  
Agreeing, and Disagreeing
Expressions for stating opinion, agreeing, and disagreeing are used 
especially when we are engaged in a discussion. Here are some 
examples:
Stating Opinion
I think…../I don’t think…..
I believe…../I don’t believe…..
In my opinion, …..
For me, …..
Personally, I think…..
Agreeing
That’s right!
Absolutely!
Exactly!
I couldn’t agree more!
I see exactly what you mean!
You’re right. That’s a good point.
Disagreeing
I don’t agree!
I totally disagree!
Absolutely not!
That’s not right!
I’m not sure about that.
                     Source: The British Council: LearnEnglishTeens, n.d.
Next, consult your dictionary if you ind any unfamiliar words or 
phrases in the materials above. Finally, listen to your teacher’s brief 
explanation on the three categories of  the expressions.
5
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
Activity 5
 Work in groups of four. Study the following sentence:
Research shows that social media platforms enable us to express, 
explore, and experiment with our identities (Gündüz, 2017), including 
future/imagined ones such as our dream jobs. 
Next, answer the question: What do you think of the above sentence? 
Here’s what to do to answer it: 
1. Do RoundRobin! Your teacher will explain how it works 
2. Make sure you have your answers ready before starting your 
group’s RoundRobin. So, draft them in your notebook if necessary 
3. Listen to your group members and respond to their answers
4. Do active listening 
5. Throughout RoundRobin, practice using the three categories of 
expressions you have previously learned 
Activity 6a
 This is individual work. Follow the instructions: 
1. Carefully listen to the recording. You can ind it through the link or 
scan the QR code on page 266.
2. Listen again
3. Complete the table by identifying the expressions for stating opinion, 
agreeing, and disagreeing used by the speakers in their conversation 
For each category, one expression is given as an example. 
Stating Opinion
Agreeing
Disagreeing
I am convinced that…
That’s how I see it, too.
Your idea is worth 
considering, but…
 
 
 
 
 
6
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 6b
 Individually, answer this question: Are there any other expressions 
for stating opinion, agreeing, and disagreeing that you know? Write them 
down in your notebook. Your understanding of the three categories of 
expressions will help you to succeed in doing the next activity. 
Activity 7
 
 This is individual work. Carefully read the expressions of agreeing 
and disagreeing (number 1 to 5) and ive statements of opinion in Column 
A. Next, match them by writing in Column B: a number representing the 
most suitable expression of agreeing or disagreeing for each statement 
in Column A. One has been done for you. After the matching activity, 
challenge yourself to elaborate on your agreement or disagreement 
based on the opinions stated in column A.
I have to say, I disagree with you.
1
I agree with that. 
2
I couldn’t agree more.
3
That makes sense!
4
That’s true.
5
A
B
I think digital technologies signiicantly help us to connect 
globally with youth from all over the world. 
5
I think not all students are aware of how digital spaces can 
support their personal interests.  
I guess our information and communication technology 
(ICT) lessons should show us how to make the best use of 
digital technologies for a better life. 
I argue that students should start to use technology as 
producers, such as to create software, not just as consumers. 
I don’t agree that parents use their fear of technology, such 
as becoming addicted and wasting time, to prevent their 
kids from using social media and online spaces for learning.
7
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
In your notebook, write down what you have learned so far in this 
Listening Lesson along with the reasons why you need them in 
your English learning and beyond.
What Have You Learned So Far?
Some people have their own preferences and choices, including 
not to be on any social media. Why do you think we need to respect 
theirs? Think about it. Share your thoughts with one or two of your 
classmates. Attentively, listen to what they say. Learn from each 
other’s thoughts.
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 8
 Work in groups of four. Listen to the dialog of three people talking 
about how technology, social media, and online spaces are tools for 
youth’s learning and becoming. You can ind it through the link or QR 
code on page 266.
After listening to the audio, with your group members, list down the 
expressions for stating opinion, agreeing, and disagreeing used by the 
speakers in the dialog. Write them down in your notebook. Compare 
your notes with your group members’. Consult your teacher if you have 
any questions related to the expressions used in the dialog.
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 9
 You have learned how to state your opinion, show your agreement 
and disagreement. It is time for you to work individually. Follow the steps:
8
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
1. Watch your favorite episode of a talk show on YouTube
2. Identify the expressions used by the host and the guest
Copy the table in Activity 6 to help you. It has the three categories of 
expressions you learn in this lesson. Notes: If you have limited access to 
the Internet, consult with your teacher. She/he will give you alternative 
work to do. 
Linking Related Texts
Activity 10
A Favorite Public Figure
Look at the following photos of two accomplished igures who utilize 
their social media for constructing their identities and shaping the world. 
 Individually, answer the following questions. Write your answers 
in your notebook: 
1. Do you have any idols or favorite public igures? 
2. If so, do you follow her/his social media? 
3. If you do, is there any of her/his statement or opinion posted on her/
his social media that struck you the most? 
4. What does her/his statement say? 
5. What do you think of the statement?
Picture 1.2 Kalis Mardiasih  
writer, storyteller, editor, and activist
Source: Screenshot of IG @kalis.mardiasih  
(June 23, 2022)
Picture 1.3 Joshua Irwandi  
photographer and inalist of Pulitzer Prize
Source: Screenshot of IG @joshirwandi  
(September 13, 2021)
9
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
Speaking
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to use suitable expressions for 
stating opinions, agreeing and disagreeing in a spoken transactional 
conversation with your peers.
Building Knowledge of the Field
 
Activity 1
Look at the picture. Next, answer the following question. What are these 
students doing?
Picture 1.4  
Picture 1.4  
Students’ 
Students’ activity  
activity  
in their learning
in their learning
 Now, work in pairs. Recall what you learned from 
your last Listening Lesson. You might want to use the 
following questions to help you: 
1. What did you speciically learn from the lesson? 
2. Why do you need to learn them? 
3. Which part of the lesson do you ind the most 
meaningful? 
10
Activity 2
 Work in groups of six. Make a list of your own opinions around 
youth’s use of digital technologies, social media, and online spaces for 
learning and becoming (i.e., constructing your future identities).  Next, 
with the list at hand, learn further via Inside-Outside Circle! What is 
it? Your teacher will explain how it works. 
Modeling of Text
Activity 3a
Carefully read the following materials.
Pronunciation: Word Stress
Why is word stress important? 
1. Stressing the wrong syllable in a word can make the word very 
diicult to hear and understand.
2. Stressing a word differently can change the meaning or type of 
word.
3. Even if the speaker can be understood, mistakes with word stress 
can make the listener feel irritated, or perhaps even amused, 
and could prevent good communication from taking place. 
Marking stress is one of the ways to practice avoiding mistakes with 
word stress.
Source: The British Council: LearnEnglishTeens, n.d.
Follow your teachers’ instructions on what to do next with the text.
11
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
Activity 3b
Take a look at the three words with multiple syllables. Pay attention 
to the use of a short vertical line above and immediately before the 
syllable being emphasized.
opinion 
 
/əˈpɪn.jən/
agree  
 
/əˈɡriː/
disagree 
 
/ˌdɪs.əˈɡriː/
Now, individually, practice pronouncing each of the three words with 
the correct stress.
Activity 4
 Work in groups of four. You will learn through Team Jigsaw. It is a 
stimulating way of cooperating with your classmates. Your teacher will 
explain further about it. 
Here’s what to do before you start. Consult your online or oline 
dictionary for two purposes: 
1. To get the meanings of each of the words 
2. To know how to pronounce each of them, speciically the stress 
Focus only on the words assigned to your group.
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Group 5 
Group 6
agree 
sure 
view
disagree 
true 
point
think 
opposite  
doubt
believe 
afraid 
mean
argue 
right 
sense
see 
certain 
case 
Have fun with your Team Jigsaw groups! Remember, focus on how to 
pronounce the above words with the correct stress. 
12
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
In your notebook, write down with your own words the importance 
of word stress along with the examples from your own or others' 
experience. 
What Have You Learned So Far?
Not all of us, perhaps including you, dare to speak our mind, 
especially in public. Think of any possible cause to that and how to 
mend them. 
Your teacher will use Jot Thoughts to help you and your classmates 
come up with the causes along with the ways to mend each of them. 
She/he will explain to you how Jot Thoughts works.
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 5
 Work in pairs. Study the following situations. 
Situation 1
You have a miscommunication problem with a new online friend. You 
know you need help. That is why you go to a classmate you trust because 
of her/his experience. You ask for her/his opinions. Listen and respond 
to what she/he says. 
Situation 2
You just uploaded a new book review video on your social media. Not 
long after that, you receive a harsh comment about the video from 
someone you do not know. You feel bad about it. You go to a classmate 
you trust, ask for her/his opinions, and respond accordingly. 
13
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
Here’s what to do: 
1. Prepare a dialog with your partner based on one of the above situations
2. Make sure you use the expressions you learned in the Listening Lesson 
3. Pay attention to the word stress in your pronunciation
4. Perform the dialog in front of your teacher and peers
5. Listen to their feedback for your performance.
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 6
 Similar to what you did in Activity 5, here you also work in pairs. 
First, study the situation:
Your best friend comes to you. She/he is asking for your opinion about 
an issue. Her/his parents always think that joining an online fanbase is 
useless. Tell her/him your opinions and be ready with her/his responses. 
Here’s what to do next: 
1. With your partner, videotape the dialog (expected length: 1–2 
minutes)
2. Upload it on your social media
3. Tag your partner and teacher
Linking Related Texts
Activity 7
A Public Figure’s English
There must be at least one Indonesian public igure whose English 
catches your attention. 
 Individually, follow the instructions: 
1. Focus on one of those public igures 
2. Find her/his online videos, especially in the occasions where she/he 
uses English 
14
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
3. Observe her/his English
4. Pay attention to her/his word stress
5. Answer the question: What do you think of her/his use of word 
stress? 
6. Write the results of your observation in your notebook
Reading
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to suitably identify an author’s/
content creator’s purpose in their multimodal text (i.e., social media 
post).
 
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1a
Look at the picture. Then, answer the following questions: 
1. Which one is your most preferred social media platform?
2. Why do you prefer that particular platform? 
Share your answers with a classmate next to you.
So, what seems to be the 
purpose of this post?
Well, I think…
Picture 1.5  
Figuring out the 
purposes of  
a social  
media post
15
 Next, individually, answer the following questions in your notebook: 
1. What’s your dream job? 
2. Do you have someone famous whose job is your dream job? 
3. If you do, do you follow any of her/his social media? 
4. If you do, tell us about one of her/his job-related posts that inspire 
you the most? 
5. What’s the overall purpose of her/his posts on social media?
Activity 1b
 Finally, work in groups of four 
or ive. Share your answers with your 
group members through RoundRobin. 
Note: If you are not into social media, 
consult with your teacher for an 
alternative activity. 
Activity 2
Look at the following photo of 
Maudy Ayunda.
Picture 1.6 Maudy Ayunda, 
singer, actor, and educator
Source: Screenshot of 
IG @maudyayunda/
rebeccaouphotography 
(June 9, 2021)
16
Do you know her? If you don’t, do some simple online search about her. 
Or, if you do not have your phone/computer with you, ask a classmate 
who does to give you some information about her. Here’s one of her 
social media entries:
My two years at Stanford taught me many things. Accounting, inance 
– you name it. But I also learned to shift my perspective on what 
leadership truly is.
Source: @maudyayunda, March 9, 2022
Discuss the entry with your classmate through Think-Pair-Share. Then, 
answer to the following question: What might be Maudy’s purpose for 
posting the tweet? 
 
Modeling of Text
In this Reading Lesson, you will study the different purposes that 
authors and content creators display in their work. 
 
Activity 3
 This is individual work. Carefully read the following materials. 
Then, listen to your teacher’s explanation.
Authors’ Purposes
In general, authors have one or more of the following purposes 
displayed in their writing:
• 
To persuade: a) convincing the reader of the merits of a certain 
point of view, b) persuading the reader to agree with this point of 
view, and c) subsequently taking a particular course of action,
• 
To inform: a) enlightening their readership about a real-world 
topic, b) providing lots of facts, and c) educating readers on a 
given topic, 
17
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
• 
To entertain: keep things as interesting as possible, 
• 
To explain: a) telling the reader how to do something, b) revealing 
to them how something works, c) communicating a method or a 
process, 
• 
To describe: a) describing something [or someone] in more detail 
than be conveyed in a photograph alone and b) getting us beyond 
the one-dimensional appearance of things [people].
Source: Literacy Ideas for Teachers and Students, n.d.
Content Creators’ Purposes
In today’s digital age, people also use digital platforms and online 
spaces especially social media for identity construction, i.e., shaping 
their imagined identities such as professional identities (e.g., media 
inluencer, writer, chef, scientist, fashion designer, etc.).  
Thus, they—creators—use their social media for various purposes, 
including:
• 
Sharing thoughts and images,
• 
Enhancing a sense of connection with others,
• 
Learning new things, especially with others,
• 
Sharing authentic stories,
• 
Engaging in social storytelling,
• 
Asserting agency, i.e., the need to assert oneself and make 
decisions based on personal interest and values (Locke, 2015),
• 
Building identity narratives (stories of their developing self),
• 
Co-authoring identity narratives,
• 
Interacting identity narratives.
Source: Granic, Morita, Scholten 2020
18
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 4
The following text is from a post written by a teenage blogger. Read it 
carefully.
The Blogging Algorithm Works
First and foremost, with blogging the algorithm works. Any of you who 
use Instagram will know it takes a lot of trial and error to inally have a 
post ‘blow up’. With blogging, as long as you are equipped with the right 
tools, your blog post can easily blow up. If it is good content it will 
be pushed to the top of search results, be over everyone’s Pinterest feed, 
and get good response. My yoga post, that I made at the start of the year, 
astonished me by getting over a 100 likes (when I usually get 20). It took 
off because I added the right tags, quality photos and conveyed a positive 
message. Unlike with Instagram, where a post can have all the correct 
criteria, yet still lop.
Source: Catherine, 2020
 This is individual work. Based on the above text, complete the 
following table. Refer to the information about authors’ and content 
creators’ purposes in Activity 3. After the table is completed, follow the 
discussion led by your teacher.
What’s the 
topic?
What’s the purpose of 
the content creator’s 
blog post?
What might be the 
whole (including the 
other parts not shown 
here) blog post about?
19
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
Activity 5
Carefully read the following inspiring social media post by Greysia 
Polii, an athlete and Chair of Athlete Commission. Her original post is in 
Indonesian language. The following is the translated version.
Picture 1.7 Greysia Polii, badminton player 
Source: Screenshot of IG @greyspolii/raphaelsachetat (May 11, 2022)
If someone asks what is the beneit of becoming Chair of Athlete 
Commission? Honestly, I don’t really have the answer. One thing 
for sure, I am here to learn and to serve. Learning does not mean 
that it is for myself but it is for the beneit of many people. It is to 
learn technical things that I have never done before. It is learning to 
negotiate, giving opinion, giving aspiration, and serving with all my 
heart. During my journey, there will be pros and cons. It really doesn’t 
matter. I will keep doing this noble task with my best attitude. We all 
hope that badminton will be loved and favored more by everyone in 
the world.
Source: @greyspolii, May 11, 2022
 Now, turn to a classmate next to you. Keep in mind the materials 
presented in Activity 3 as the two of you discuss the following: 
1. The topic of Greysia Polii’s Instagram post
2. The overall purpose of her post
20
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
In your notebook, write down what you have learned so far in this 
Reading Lesson along with the reasons why you need them in your 
English learning and beyond.
What Have You Learned So Far?
 This is individual work. Carefully read the following: Your 
friends and followers on social media do not always get the purpose 
of your posts/captions. You might get misunderstood but you do not 
always have the time and energy to clarify things. What are some of 
the strategies that you have to stay conident in social media? List 
them down in your notebook. Note: If you do not have it or you are 
not into social media, consult with your teacher for an alternative 
activity.
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 6
Jein Setiyanto Hendri is an Indonesian author whose books, Kita dan 
Kata and ini tentang segala yang aku kira tidak akan pernah baik-baik 
saja, were well-received by Indonesian youths. Look at one of his social 
media entries. His original post is in Indonesian language. The following 
is the translated version.
I always see myself competing to outperform others. Then I’m tired. 
I’m tired. I’m disappointed because I always lose. I too often make a 
race arena that makes me stress myself.
Source: @setiyantohendri, December 29, 2021
21
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
 With your partner from Activity 4, talk about the purpose of his 
caption. Offer your explanation. Discuss with her/him the similarities 
and/or differences in your answers/ explanations, if there are any. 
Consult your teachers if you have any diiculties in the process. Finally, 
individually write your answer and explanation in your notebook.
Activity 7
Aan Mansyur is another author whose work is well-known among 
Indonesian youths. One of his social media posts has the following photo. 
The following is the translated version of his post, which is originally in 
Indonesian language.
Picture 1.8 Aan Mansyur, writer
Source:  Screenshot of IG @aanmansyur (2018)
after a long day of sitting in front of 
the computer and only getting one 
bad paragraph. writing is painful –
Source: (@aanmansyur, October 17, 2018)
Next, follow the instructions: 
1. Similar to what you did in Activity 5, identify the purpose of Aan’s 
post above
2. Provide your explanation
3. Write them down in your notebook
4. Do it on your own this time
5. Exchange your work with your classmate’s after you have inished it
6. Ask her/him to comment on your work
7. Do the same for her/his work. Focus on how the explanation or 
evidence support the purpose that she/he identiied. 
8. Ask your teacher if you have any questions/diiculties in the process 
of commenting on your classmate's work.
22
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 8
 After working with a classmate, it is time for you to work individually. 
Follow the instructions: 
1. Go to your role model’s social media
2. Pick one of her/his posts; one that inspires you to pursue your dream 
job
3. Take a screenshot of the post
4. Save the link to the post for a proper citation/rule of attribution 
when needed later
5. Identify her/his purpose for posting it on social media
6. Provide some explanation
7. Write them down in your notebook
Note: If you have limited access to the Internet, consult with your 
teacher for an alternative activity.
 
Linking Related Texts
Activity 9
 Individually, follow the instructions: 
1. If she/he is a public igure as well, your role model might have social 
media from multiple platforms
2. Observe if her/his posts display similar purpose(s) across platforms
3. Write the results of your observation in your notebook
Note: If you have limited access to the Internet, consult with your 
teacher for an alternative activity.
23
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
Viewing
 
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to make evidence-based 
inferences to comprehend implicit information in a multimodal text 
(i.e., social media post).
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1a
 This is individual work. Follow the instructions: 
Read the following questions carefully. Answer each of them in a few 
sentences: 1)  How was your last Reading Lesson? 2) How do you like 
it? 3) Which learning activity do you like the most? 4) Which learning 
materials from the lesson do you remember the most?
Activity 1b
Next, follow the steps: 
1. Double check your sentences. Save them for your social media 
caption.
2. Think of a photo from your smart phone’s gallery that goes well 
with your sentences. 
3. Post them (the caption and photo) on your social media 
Note: If you are not into social media, consult with your teacher for an 
alternative activity. 
24
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 2
You must have heard this saying or catchphrase: 
reading between the lines
reading between the lines
 
 
 
Picture 1.9 A catchphrase about reading
 Talk about its meaning with a classmate next to you. You might 
want to do some online searches as well. Take some notes in your 
notebook. Do so individually. Share what you have written there with 
a classmate. 
Your Viewing Lesson is about this important skill: reading between the 
lines or making inferences. Let’s get started!
Modeling of Text
Activity 3a
Read the following materials about implicit information and making 
inferences.
Implicit information is information that is implied or suggested, 
but not communicated directly. In order to comprehend implicit 
information, we make inferences.
25
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
Making inferences is the process of drawing a conclusion based on 
the available evidence plus previous knowledge and experience. 
Source: Literacy Ideas for Teachers and Students, n.d.
For inferential skills to be truly mastered, an initial understanding 
of the text should be the irst priority.
Inferences can be made with regard to: feelings, motives, behaviors/
actions (how, when, where, why), relationships, impression 
of personality (based on appearance, dialogue, movement, 
description), impression of an object/place/atmosphere, the state 
of things, opinions, reactions, predictions, events – what does or 
doesn’t happen (how, when, where, why, who), morals/ messages, 
vocabulary used/grammar and punctuation (authorial intent), and 
time/era story is set. 
Source: OneEducation, n.d. 
Based on the above concepts, the following is key when making 
inferences:
•     having an initial understanding of the text, 
•     providing evidence from the text,
•     having previous knowledge,
•     having previous experience.
Activity 3b
 This is group work. To better understand the above materials, 
follow your teacher’s instructions. With your group members, you will 
work cooperatively through Numbered-Heads Together.  
26
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 4
 This is individual work. However, your teacher will closely guide 
you through the process. In this activity, you recall what you learned 
from the previous Reading Lesson about content creators’ purposes as 
relected in their posts. You will then connect it with what you have just 
learned about making inferences to comprehend implicit information. 
Recall the purpose of Maudy Ayunda’s social media entry from your 
Reading Lesson. It serves as your initial understanding of the text. Based 
on it, make an inference to recognize a piece of implicit information: 
Maudy’s personality traits.
What is your initial inference about her personality traits? Write it 
down here:
Use the following prompts and the available spaces to guide you further 
in the inference-making process.
1. Did you ind any evidence from the entry to support your initial 
interference about Maudy’s personality trait? 
 
2. Do you have any previous information about Maudy? 
 
3. Do you have any previous experience related to Maudy’s work (e.g., 
books, songs, movies, and talks)? 
 
Finally, based on your initial understanding of Maudy’s social media 
entry, evidence from the post, your previous knowledge, and previous 
experience with her work, answer the following questions: 
1. Do you now have the same inference as your initial inference about 
Maudy’s personality traits? 
2. If so, why is that the case?
27
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
Use the space provided to write your answers.
If that is not the case, write down the new inference in the space 
provided:
Note: Consult your teacher if you and your peer have any diiculties in 
the process of making the inferences.
In your notebook, briely answer the following questions with your 
own words: 
1. What is implicit information? 
2. How does implicit information relate to inference? 
3. What do we need to have as we are making inference?
What Have You Learned So Far?
Having a reading habit is good for our personal growth. Yet, 
sometimes distractions get in the way. What strategies do you 
usually use to deal with distractions when reading? Why do you 
pick those strategies? Write your answers in your notebook.
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 5
This activity is similar to what you did in the previous activity, Activity 
4. What makes it different is that this time you work with your peers 
to make inferences. Recall the purpose of Aan Mansyur’s social media 
28
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
entry from your Reading Lesson. It serves as your initial understanding 
of the text. Based on it, make an inference to recognize a piece of implicit 
information: His work ethic.
What is your initial inference about his work ethic? Write it down here:
Use the prompts and the spaces provided to guide you further.
Did you ind any evidence from the post? 
Do you have any previous information about him and his work (e.g., 
books)? 
Do you have any previous experience related to him and his work (e.g., 
books)? 
Finally, based on your initial understanding of his social media post (i.e., 
his main purpose), evidence from the post, your previous knowledge, 
and previous experience related to his work, answer the following 
questions. Use the space provided to write your answers.
Do you now have the same inference as your initial inference about his 
work ethic as a creator?
If so, why is that the case? 
If that is not the case, write down the new inference in the space 
provided:
29
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 6
 This is individual work. Now that you have practiced making 
inference for comprehending implicit information with your peers, it is 
time to do it on your own. Follow the instructions: 
1. Revisit Greysia Polii and Jein’s Instagram posts from your Reading 
Lesson
2. Look at them one more time
3. Choose one of them as your focus in this activity
4. Follow the same steps that you took in Activity 4 and Activity 5
5. Take notes in your notebook
The implicit information that you have to work on is: How she/he 
handles negativity from netizens.
Linking Related Texts
Activity 7
 This is individual work. Reading between the lines has been this 
viewing lesson’s theme. Think of why the skill is signiicant for youth 
in this digital age, especially in constructing their dream/imagined 
identities. You might want to do some online search, interview a friend, 
watch videos, read articles, etc. to get the answers. Take some notes 
in your notebook. Next, synthesize them. Write the synthesis result for 
your social media post/caption for the day. What does it read? See what 
your friends/followers have to say about your post/caption. Note: If 
you do not have it or you are not into social media, consult with your 
teacher for an alternative way of sharing the result of your synthesis.
30
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Writing
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to: 1) correctly formulate 
subject questions for your interactive and engaging social media 
caption; 2) post an interactive and engaging caption on your social 
media with the correct use of subject questions.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 Work in groups of four. Follow the instructions: 
1. Talk about a world-class inspiring youth 
such as Greta Thunberg (look at her 
photo in the following), a climate and 
environment activist
2. Make sure your choice is different from 
the other groups
3. Check her/his social media account and 
select one post there that is the most 
engaging and interactive
4. Provide your group’s explanation for 
the choice
5. Do One Stray
Follow your teacher’s guidelines for doing it.
Picture 1.10 Greta Thunberg, 
environmental activist 
Source: Screenshot of IG  
@gretathunberg (March 9, 2022)
31
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
Activity 2
Look at the following Instagram photo and caption  by an American 
artist named Paola (Paolita) Merrill:
Is there snow where you live? I deinitely love spring most, but 
winter does feel quite magical. I always think about stepping into 
Narnia when the snow is freshly fallen. I decided to read my irst 
ever scary story, Coraline, and follow it up with a collection of 
ghostly tales for adults that was recommended to me. I have never 
successfully gotten through a spooky book, maybe this will be the 
irst! I’m a big chicken, anything scares me. That’s why I’m starting 
with a children’s book haha! Do you like scary stories, or have any 
recommendations?
Picture 1.11 Paola (Paolita) Merrill, artist 
Source: Screenshot of IG @the_cottage_fairy (December 18, 2021)
Now, turn to a classmate. Talk about the following: 
1. What makes Paola’s post engaging and interactive
2. Your ideas to make it more engaging and interactive
3. In your notebook, take some notes from your discussion  
32
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Modeling of Text
Activity 3
Read the following tips for writing effective captions.
The Key to Writing Killer Captions for Social Media
Ask a Question
An important part of building a social media presence is engagement, 
or your interaction with followers, as it is a proven way to gain more 
“likes” and comments, and generally boost interest in your platform. 
A great way to do this is to add a simple question to your caption 
about a speciic element of your post and encourage your viewers to 
respond: “What do you prefer?” or “What is your favorite ___?” This 
gives them the positive feeling of being involved.
(British Council, n.d.)
Next, read the above text once more. Consult your dictionary to get the 
meanings of the following words (nouns) and noun phrase:
social media presence  
 
followers 
engagement 
 
 
 
 
interest   
interaction  
 
 
 
 
platform
caption 
 
 
 
 
 
viewers
Next, follow your teacher’s next instruction.
33
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
Activity 4
 This is individual work. After reading the tips, go back to Activity 
2. Look at Paola’s Instagram post once again. Speciically, take a closer 
look at the questions in her caption. Use your notebook for answering 
the following questions: 
1. How many questions do you see in her caption? List them down. 
2. In your opinion, what’s the function of each question in her caption?
Activity 5
A type of question that we can use in our social media posts to boost 
engagement and interaction with our friends/followers is subject 
question. What is it? Read the following information.
What are subject questions?
Subject questions are questions we ask when we want information 
about the subject of something. The subject of a sentence is the person 
or thing that performs the action. We use subject questions to ask 
who or which person or thing does something: for example, “Who 
rode the train to work?” and “Which fruits make the best juice?”
Subject questions follow the same subject-verb structure as 
statements. “Who rode the train to work?” for example, has the same 
structure as its statement form would have: “I rode the train to work.” 
Unlike some kinds of questions, we do not invert the subject and verb 
in subject questions. You can usually identify a subject question by 
looking for the word “who” or “which” at the beginning of it. But, not 
all questions beginning with these words are subject questions.
Source: VoA Learning English, 2018
34
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 6
Go back to Activity 2. Look  at Paola’s Instagram post one last time. Based 
on what she says in her caption, generate three (3) subject questions 
that you can offer to make her caption more engaging and interactive. 
 Individually, list down the questions. One question is given as an 
example: Who likes reading spooky books?
1.    
2.    
3.    
Next, compare your questions with your classmate(s). Give feedback to 
each other. Consult your teacher when needed. 
 
Complete the table. Use your own words to do so.
How does asking questions 
in your social media captions 
help boost interaction and 
engagement with your 
friends/followers?
Why having subject questions 
in your social media captions 
can help boost interaction 
and engagement with your 
friends/followers?
What Have You Learned So Far?
35
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
As social beings, we need others’ presence and support for our 
growth. We do the same for their growth. This means we need to 
respect them during face-to-face interaction and in online spaces. 
In your notebook, list down ways to show and uphold respect, 
speciically in our online interaction with others.
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 7
 Work in groups of four or ive. Look at the picture. Follow the 
instructions: 
1. Act as if you had a traveling company
2. Prepare a social media post based on the given picture
3. Engage your followers with the post
4. Formulate correct subject questions to accompany the picture
5. Use your notebook to draft your subject questions
6. Consult your teacher if you have any diiculties in the process of 
drafting your subject questions.
7. Share the questions with your group members via Jot Thoughts 
 
 
  Picture 1.12 Terasering of Indonesia
36
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 8
 Work in the same group as you did in Activity 7. Follow the 
instructions: 
1. Prepare an A4 paper for a name tent for each group member
2. Write your dream job on the front side of the tent
Picture 1.13 Name tent
Scientist
3. Based on what you have in mind about your dream job, prepare as 
many subject questions as possible
4. Draft them in your notebook
5. Share the questions with your group members through RoundRobin
6. After RoundRobin, select one to three questions that you like the most
7. Use them for your social media captions
8. Select a photo from your smart phone’s photo gallery that you think 
suits your caption
9. Post them (caption and photo) on your social media
10. Tag your teacher on your post and ask her/him to comment on it
Note: Consult your teacher if you do not have or choose not to have any 
social media account.
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 9
 This is individual work. Follow the instructions: 
1. Think of a job that you dream of, for example: a journalist in an 
international media
37
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
2. Find out how to get there; all it takes to be an international journalist
3. Do so by making use of your social media
4. To engage and interact with your social media friends/followers, 
use three subject questions in your caption 
5. Draft them in your notebook
6. Select a photo from your smart phone’s photo gallery that suits your 
caption
7. Post them (caption and photo) on your social media
Note: Consult your teacher if you do not have or choose not to have any 
social media.
 
Linking Related Texts
Activity 10
 This is individual work. Follow the instructions: 
1. As a follow up for Activity 9, observe your social media 
friends/followers’ responses/comments to your post
2. Pay attention to the contents of their responses/comments
3. Take some notes in your notebook
4. Compare your notes with a classmate’s notes, speciically the one 
who uses a different social media platform
5. Pay attention to the tone of the comments across social media 
platforms
6. Write the results of your comparison in your notebook
Note: Consult your teacher if you do not have or choose not to have any 
social media.
  
38
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Presenting
 
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to talk about the process of 
drafting and posting contents on your social media with correct 
transitional words and suitable graphic organizer for showing 
sequences.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 
 This is individual work. Look at the following picture. Next, read 
the two questions carefully. Write your answers in your notebook: 
1. How does the above picture relate to you? 
2. How do you usually draft your social media posts?
Any spelling 
mistakes?
Is this the best 
photo?
What else 
should I say?
What will 
they say?
Does it sound OK?
Will they like it?
Picture 1.14  
Picture 1.14  
Drafting  
Drafting  
for a 
for a social  
social  
media
media post
 post
39
Activity 2
 This is individual work. Answer the question through the Venn 
diagram: How does conventional writing differ from social media posts? 
When it is ready, compare your work with a classmate next to you.
Conventional 
Writing
Social Media 
Posts
Modeling of Text
Activity 3
 This is individual work. There are moments in your daily life 
when people want to hear about how you use digital technologies 
and literacies for learning and for shaping your future identities. The 
following materials will help to equip you to shine in those moments. 
Read them carefully.
The irst is about transitional words for showing sequence. 
Transitional Words for Showing Sequence
Transitional words and phrases connect and relate ideas, sentences, 
and paragraphs. They assist in the logical low of ideas as they signal 
the relationship between sentences and paragraphs. They develop, 
relate, connect and move ideas. 
40
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Of the many categories of transitional words, our focus here is 
on ones for showing sequence. Some of them are: irst, second, (etc.), 
inally, hence, next, then, from here on, to begin with, last of all, after, 
before, as soon as, in the end, gradually. 
Source: Miami Dade College, n.d.
The next is about graphic organizers, speciically its type for showing 
sequences.
Graphic Organizer for Showing Sequence
Graphic organizer plays a signiicant role in a presentation. It allows 
you to effectively create meaningful structures, make relationships 
of ideas, and have precise information. But depending on the context, 
the organizers have a variety of uses. One of them is for showing 
sequences. 
 There are many examples of this type of graphic organizer. You 
can ind them online. An example is displayed in the following:
First
Next
Then
And
Finally
Source: Opinaldo 2015; TeamTomEducation, 2017
  
Activity 4
 This is individual work. Now that you have learned the two, 
transitional words and graphic organizer for showing sequence, follow 
the instruction: 
1. Go back to your work for Activity 9 (stage: Independent Construction 
of Text) of your last Writing Lesson
41
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
2. In your notebook, list down the steps that took you to inally post 
the photo and caption on your social media
3. Use correct transitional words in your work
Activity 5
Next, based on your work above (Activity 4), create a graphic organizer 
for showing sequences in your textbook. You can use the sample from 
Activity 3 (stage: Modeling of Text) or use any other of similar type that 
you found online. 
In your notebook, write in a few words what you have learned so 
far in this Presenting Lesson. Also, explain how they are relevant 
with you and your daily life.
What Have You Learned So Far?
The following is a social media caption by Adam Grant, a well-
known American author and organizational psychologist. Read it 
carefully. Next, in your notebook, answer the question: How does 
the quote relate to your presenting lesson that you are doing right 
now?
The most meaningful way to succeed is to help others succeed.
Source: @AdamMGrant, October 24, 2022
A Mid-Lesson Relection
42
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 6
 This is pair work. Follow the instructions: 
1. Read the situation:
 
You want to know great social media accounts that are speciically 
dedicated to update the latest knowledge and innovation about 
your dream job. Use your social media to get the information from 
your friends/followers who share the same interests or dream jobs 
with you. 
2. Draft/craft the post carefully
3. Post it on your social media
4. Share the process of drafting and posting it via a graphic organizer 
for showing the sequence
5. Display the graphic organizer in your notebook
6. Based on the graphic organizer you created, talk about the process 
with a classmate
7. Use transitional words for showing sequence in your talk 
8. Listen to each other
9. Take some notes
10. Give feedback to each other and consult your teacher when needed. 
Note: If you do not have it or you are not into social media, consult with 
your teacher for an alternative activity. 
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 7
 This is individual work. Follow the instructions: 
1. Study the situation: 
 
Gradually, you gain an understanding of the importance of having 
a role model in shaping your future identity, i.e., in the process of 
43
Unit 1 Digital Literacies and My Identities
your becoming. You want to increase your peers’ understanding of 
the same issue via your social media.
2. Draft/craft the post carefully
3. When it is ready, upload it on your social media
4. Share the process of drafting and posting it via a graphic organizer 
for showing sequence
5. Display the graphic organizer in your notebook
6. Based on the graphic organizer you created, prepare a 1-2 minute 
talk about the process
7. In your talk, use transitional words for showing sequence
8. Video record your talk
9. Upload it on one of your social media accounts. 
Note: If you do not have it or you are not into social media, consult with 
your teacher for an alternative activity. 
Linking Related Texts
Activity 8
 This is individual work. Go to your school library or any local library 
in which you are a member. Browse their collections of magazines or 
newspapers. Find a section there that features a successful or impactul 
igure in Indonesia. Pay attention to the description of how people 
around her/him contribute to the success. Take some notes in your 
notebook. In the next lesson, share with your classmates what you have 
written. 
An End-of-Unit Relection
Activity 9
Congratulations on completing Unit 1! What does this unit mean to you? 
How has your perspective on digital technologies and literacies changed 
after completing the unit? Write your answers in your notebook.
44
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
