Unit
Unit 
2
Love Your Environment
KEMENTERIAN PENDIDIKAN, KEBUDAYAAN, RISET, DAN TEKNOLOGI
REPUBLIK INDONESIA, 2022
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Penulis: Puji Astuti, dkk.
ISBN: 978-602-427-944-8 (jil.2)
What can you do with 
your environment?
Mind Mapping the Unit
Love Your  
Environment
Unit 2
Grammar
present tense, and 
the pattern 'of noun 
of place + that...' and 
'noun of place +  
where ...'
Writing and Presenting
writing and presenting 
descriptive text about a 
place, and using correct 
punctuation
Listening  
and Speaking
types of expression  
and phrases about 
domestic waste
Reading  
and Viewing
identifying the main 
idea, and the author’s 
purposes
Text type
descriptive
• 
waste management
• 
domestic waste
• 
organized waste
• 
unorganized waste
• 
describing places
• 
ive senses
• 
adjective phrases
• 
punctuation
Keywords
Vocabulary
words related to 
types of waste, 
ive senses, and 
adjective phrases
S+V
A
B
C
Aa
Bb
46
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
47
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Listening
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to correctly identify types of 
expressions that relate to issues of domestic waste.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 Form a group of four or ive. Check the National Geographic 
YouTube Channel about Waste. Take a note on the scene that interests 
you most. Discuss it with the group member using the Talking Chip. 
Activity 2
 Work in pairs. Do Give-One, Get-One. Compare these two pictures. 
Which one is organized and which one is unorganized? What is the 
impact to you and your surroundings if your waste is unorganized? 
Picture 2.1 Organized and unorganized waste
48
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Write the answers on the following space: 
Activity 3
 Work in pairs. Do Think-Pair-Share activity. Listen carefully to 
the description given in the audio. You can ind it through the link or 
QR code on page 266. Take a note and focus on the following questions:
1.  What is the speaker describing?
2. Where do you think the place he ends up is?
3. How do you know it?
Modeling of Text
Activity 4
 Work individually. Read the following explanation of using ive 
senses (sight, taste, touch, smell, sound) to describe a place.
49
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
How to write with sight
Writing Prompt. Stand in front of your house and create a list of 
20 things you notice about it. Write down colors, shapes, details. 
Be as speciic as you can. When you’re done, pick the three or four 
of the most interesting things you noticed, and use those to write 
a description of the building. Remember, if you’re trying to create 
a strong visual sense of scene, try highlighting unusual or speciic 
details. 
Writing Tip. One good technique to keep in mind is describing things 
indirectly: To convey the brightness of the sun, you could say directly 
that the sun is bright, but you could also describe the way the light 
from the sun causes the glass windows to shine solid. 
Example: The sunlight is making the window glass shine.
How to write with taste
Writing Prompt. Try describing the food or the drink when you are 
eating or drinking them. What does coffee taste like? Is it different 
from the usual coffee? Try describing the sensation of tasting your 
favorite childhood snacks—what does it feel like to experience that 
taste again?
Writing Tip. One common technique that writers often use is the 
deliberate mixing of sensory words for effect. For instance, you might 
describe the zesty taste of a lemon as bright (a visual description) or 
the last light dissolving over the horizon as a whimper (an auditory 
description).
Example: The cold lemon squash is freezing in my tongue.
How to write with touch
Writing Prompt. Write about what it feels like to sit in a soft chair. 
How does your body feel when you sit there? Are the places where 
you feel sore or stiff?
50
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Writing Tip. The sense of touch is about more than the way things 
feel in your hands, although texture is an important part of it. Touch 
also captures sensations that typically occur internally, like your 
experience of temperature, pain, and pleasure.
Example: When I touch the book, I feel the dust on my ingers.
How to write with smell
Writing Prompt. Go to a place you know well, for example the kitchen 
in your house. Make a list of the smells that deine that place for you. 
The piney scent of the trees, the antiseptic smell of cleaning luids, 
and the buttery smell of the ingredients your mother uses when she 
is cooking, so on.
Writing Tip. As with perfume and cologne, a little bit goes a long 
way. A few well-placed details can create a powerful impression.
Example: When I enter the kitchen, I smell the dish my mother has 
cooked.
How to write with sound
Writing Prompt. Pay attention to the sounds you notice and write 
them down as you go. Does your teapot whistle, or would you say it 
hisses? Do the sirens of emergency vehicles wail, or perhaps blare? 
Does your door squeak? The more you can become attentive to these 
things, the more you’ll be able to incorporate them into your writing.
Writing Tip. Use onomatopoeia to help capture the sound of a scene: 
The plop of a frog dropping into a pond, the clink of two champagne 
glasses, the crackle of a dry log on a hot ire, the whoosh of a car 
racing by. 
Example: When I hear the sound ‘knock knock knock’ on the door, 
I am sure that someone is knocking on the door.
Source: Masterclass, n.d.
51
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Activity 5
After reading the explanation about using ive senses (sight, taste, touch, 
smell, and sound) go back to Activity 2 and try to write a sentence to 
describe the pictures by using ive senses.
Example: The liquid waste from the kitchen smells so bad.
1. Sight 
2. Taste
3. Touch
4. Smell
5. Sound 
52
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Grammar Focus
One thing that is often used to describe a place is the use of adjective 
clauses. The following is the explanation of an adjective clause that 
relates to describe a place.
There are two adjective clauses used to describe a place.
Noun of place + that …
Example:
The place that you are talking about.
The restaurant that sells halal food.
Noun of place + where …
Example: 
The city where I was born.
The school where she met her old friend.
Activity 6
Based on the information, make your own sentence by using the 
patterns about the waste in your surroundings (look at the examples in 
the Grammar Focus section).
Noun of place + that …
1. 
 
2. 
 
Noun of place + where …
1. 
 
2. 
 
53
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Complete the table below. Use your own words to do so.
Table 2.1 The power of ive senses
How do the ive senses make 
the description of a place more 
engaging to the listeners or 
readers?
Which of the two types of 
adjective clause is used more 
often?
What Have You Learned So Far?
People are littering or throwing trash  in public places because of 
some reasons (perhaps you also did it once or twice). Share your 
thoughts with a partner by relecting to the following:
1. Why did you trash? 
2. How did you feel when you did that? 
3. How do you feel when you see people trashing?
Write down the result of the discussion on the provided space.
A Mid-Lesson Relection
54
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 7
 Work in pairs. Watch the video about garbage in the ocean 
(Troitskiy Video). While watching and listening, take a note by focusing 
on the following questions:
1. What do you see? 
 
 
2. What can you smell?
 
 
3. What can you touch in that place? 
 
 
Your teacher will help you and give you further explanation on the task.
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 8
 Work individually. Imagine you are in a landill. Use the same 
expression to answer the following questions.
1. What can you see? 
 
 
2. What can you smell?
 
 
55
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
3. What can you hear? 
 
 
4. What can you feel? 
 
 
Linking Related Texts
Activity 9
Observe the common posters around you that suggest people not to 
trash. Design your own poster with more driving statements for people 
to not trash. Don’t forget to use ive senses and adjective clauses.
56
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Speaking
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to correctly use adjective 
phrases in a monologue or dialogue about domestic waste.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 In pairs, listen to the dialogues. Decide which picture best describes 
the dialogue.
Picture 2.2 Piles of waste in 
urban area
Picture 2.3 Piles of waste in 
mountain area
Dialogue: ___________
Dialogue: ___________
Dialogue: ___________
Dialogue: ___________
Dialogue: ___________
Picture 2.4 Piles of waste in 
beach area
Picture 2.5 Piles of waste in 
the house
Picture 2.6 Piles of waste in 
industrial area
FACTORY
FACTORY
57
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Modeling of Text
Activity 2
Listen and repeat.
Table 2.2 Adjective phrases
Adjective Phrases
a clean blue ocean
an awful dirty scenery
a big trash bin
a lovely little village
a small plastic vase
Activity 3
Find the meaning of the following words and phrases.
Table 2.3 Meaning of adjective phrases
Words
clean
blue
ocean
Meaning
Phrase
a clean blue ocean
Meaning
Words
awful
dirty
scenery
Meaning
Phrase
an awful dirty scenery
Meaning
58
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Words
big
trash
bin
Meaning
Phrase
a big trash bin
Meaning
Words
lovely 
little
village
Meaning
Phrase
a lovely little village
Meaning
Words
small
plastic
vase
Meaning
Phrase
A small plastic vase
Meaning
Activity 4
Complete the following dialogue with the phrases in activity 3.
Dialogue 1
A : What makes Labuan Bajo so famous?
B : It must be because of its __________________________
Dialogue 2
A : What a ________________________________________
B : Yeah. I bought it from the market last week. It looks nice with my 
lowers in it.
Dialogue 3
A : What do you think of Bantar Gebang?
B : Uufh. It’s _______________________________________
59
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Dialogue 4
A : How did you ind Kampung Naga?
B : It is ___________________________________________
Dialogue 5
A : What do you think we should put in the corner?
B : ___________________________________would be nice.
Activity 5
Watch a video about zero waste in a village in Japan. After that, read the 
dialogue below.
A : Wow. It is so interesting. That small town is very clean.
B : Yes. The people have been doing the program since 2003. It is a 
very long process.
A : But, look at the result. The town is now very clean with beautiful 
idyllic mountains.
B : What I admire is the effort from the people. They are such hard 
working people.
A : Of course. They separate the garbage based on a diicult long list 
of classiication.
B : Yes. It is their determination that has brought them to their current 
success.
Table 2.4 Word order in adjective phrases 
Grammar Focus
Adjectives: word order (a nice new house)
1. Sometimes, we use two or more adjectives together, for examples:
a. My brother lives in a nice new house.
b. In the kitchen, there was a beautiful large wooden table.
60
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
2. There are two kinds of adjectives:
a. Fact adjectives such as round and wooden. They give us 
factual information about age, size, color, etc.
b. Opinion objectives such as nice and beautiful. They tell us 
what somebody thinks of something or somebody.
3. Opinion adjectives usually go before fact adjectives. 
Opinion
Fact
a
nice
long
Summer holiday
an
interesting 
young
man
a
delicious
hot
Vegetable soup
4. Sometimes, we use two or more fact objectives. Very often (but 
not always) we put fact adjectives in this order:
1
2
3
4
5
NOUN
How 
big?
How old 
is it?
What 
color?
Where 
from?
What is it 
made of?
Examples: a tall young man  (1,2)
a small black plastic bag (1, 3, 5)
Source: Murphy 1998, 214-215
  
Activity 6
 Work in pairs, and put the adjectives in brackets in the correct 
position.
1. A beautiful table (wooden/ round). 
2. Big clouds (black). 
3. A sunny day (lovely). 
4. A wide avenue (long). 
5. A metal box (black/small). 
61
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Write ive new interesting things that you have learned so far. 
Write them below.
What Have You Learned So Far?
Think of what you can do as a person to keep your environment 
clean. Write your ideas.
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 7
In a group of four, write a short dialogue in your book about 
environmental awareness. Choose one of the topics:
1. Managing waste at home
2. Managing waste at school
3. Managing waste in the community
Your teacher will help you to choose the most appropriate topic and 
give you further explanation on how to do the task.
62
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 8
 Work in pairs. Create a dialogue in your book based on the pictures 
provided. Do not forget to include some adjective phrases you have 
learned so far.
Picture 2.7 Unorganized rubbish bin at school
Picture 2.8 People are queuing at a waste 
bank
Picture 2.9 A woman is planting lowers in 
the garden
63
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Linking Related Texts
Activity 9
 
Find information about waste management in other countries. You may 
ind it from social media or other reading sources.
Write your indings below.
Source of information. 
Title of the video/news/post. 
Country of origin. 
Waste management system. 
Reading
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to correctly identify the main 
ideas and the writer’s purpose in a descriptive text.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 Work in pairs. Look at the picture and discuss what is meant by 
waste management with a friend who sits next to you. Write down the 
result of your discussion in the space provided.
64
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Picture 2.10 Solid waste management
PAPER
GLASS
ORGANIC
PLASTIC
Activity 2
 Work individually. Read the text about types of waste. 
Text 1: 
Did you know that waste can actually be classiied into ive different 
types? Moreover, some types of waste are recyclable whereas others 
are not. 
1. Liquid waste is commonly found both in households as well as in 
industries. This waste includes dirty water, organic liquids, wash 
water, waste detergents and even rainwater.
65
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
2. Solid rubbish is commonly broken down into the following types:
● 
Plastic waste – This consists of bags, containers, jars, bottles 
and many other products that can be found in your household. 
Plastic is not biodegradable, but many types of plastic can be 
recycled. Plastic should not be mixed in with your regular 
waste, it should be sorted and placed in your recycling bin.
● 
Paper/card waste – This includes packaging materials, 
newspapers, cardboard and other products. Paper can easily 
be recycled and reused.
● 
Tins and metals – This can be found in various forms 
throughout your home. Most metals can be recycled.
● 
Ceramics and glass – These items can easily be recycled. Look 
for special glass recycling bins and bottle banks to dispose of 
them correctly.
3. Organic waste is another common household. All food waste, 
garden waste, manure and rotten meat are classiied as organic 
waste. Over time, organic waste is turned into manure by 
microorganisms. However, this does not mean that you can 
dispose of them anywhere.
4. Recyclable rubbish includes all waste items that can be converted 
into products that can be used again. Solid items such as paper, 
metals, furniture and organic waste can all be recycled.
5. Hazardous waste includes all types of rubbish that are lammable, 
toxic, corrosive and reactive.
ORGANIC
ANORGANIC
PAPER
GLASSESS
B3
WASTE
Source: 4waste, n.d.
Picture 2.11 Different types of waste
66
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 3
 Work in pairs. Answer the following questions by referring to text 1.
1. Which waste is recyclable and which one is not?
2. What is the difference between waste, garbage and rubbish?
Activity 4
 Work in pairs. Some words from the text are nouns and the others 
are adjectives. Look at the table and complete it with appropriate words. 
Number one has been written for you.
Table 2.5 Parts of speech
No.
Noun
Adjective
1
difference
different
2
3
4
5
Modeling of Text
 
Activity 5
 Work individually. Read the following text about descriptive text, 
and comprehend it. 
A descriptive text usually focuses on describing a single location, 
object, event, person, or place. It endeavors to engage all ive of the 
reader’s senses to evoke the sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and feel of 
the text’s subject. Generally, descriptive texts are narrow in focus and 
67
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
the topic is something that can sustain their interest, as well as the 
reader’s interest.
Descriptive texts require the writer to go into great depth to evoke 
the person, place, or thing. If the writer doesn’t care about the topic, 
then for sure the reader won’t either. As the purpose of a descriptive 
text is to describe something so vividly, and to express emotion so 
clearly, that the reader can feel it too, personal topics can provide the 
perfect material for this type of text.
The purpose of a descriptive text is also to inform the reader on a 
particular topic, event, or experience. An effective means of choosing 
a topic is by writing a thesis statement. The thesis statement lays out 
the speciic purpose of the text and usually it is embedded in the 
introductory paragraph.
Picture 2.12 Students are discussing about descriptive text
While it can be diicult at times for students to deine their thesis 
statement for a descriptive text, the following process should help 
guide students:
1. Choose an interesting topic
2. Relect on what you think about this topic
3. Consider the reasons for your point of view
4. Compose a statement that encapsulates this viewpoint.
68
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Writing descriptive texts gives students an opportunity to lex 
their creative muscles. It challenges them to ind new and innovative 
ways to use language to paint pictures in the minds of readers.
Source: Literacyideas, n.d.
Now select three words that you believe are important to remind you 
of descriptive text. Then compare the words you have selected and the 
words selected by your friend.
1. 
2. 
3. 
Activity 6
 Work in pairs. Read the explanation about the main idea, topic 
sentence, and thesis statement below.
Main idea tells what the core of the text is about.
Topic sentence tells what the paragraph is about.
Thesis statement tells what the whole text is about.
Find more explanations from the Internet and write down the answers 
in your own words in the following space.
1. Main idea is 
2. Topic sentence is 
3. Thesis statement is 
4. Where can you ind the author’s purpose in writing a 
descriptive text? Is it in the main idea, topic sentence, or thesis 
statement? 
69
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
1. Write down three things you remember most from this lesson.
 
 
 
2. Write down two new words that you got from this lesson.
 
 
3. Write down one question that relates to this lesson.
 
 
What Have You Learned So Far?
Plastics are the waste that is mostly found everywhere. People are 
using plastic bags for some reason. Share your thoughts about why 
you think they do that, and what you will do to educate people to 
stop using it in the following note.
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 7
 Work in a group of four. Read and comprehend the following text. 
Do Jigsaw Reading. You will do the activity in a group (home group), 
but each of you will focus on one paragraph and become the expert 
of the paragraph (expert group). Your teacher will give you further 
explanation on how to do Jigsaw Reading step by step.
70
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Text 2
From the 1950s to 2015, the production of plastic products grew from 
virtually zero to about 350 million tons per year. This continuous 
increase has resulted in a cumulative total of 7.8 billion tons of plastic 
produced during this period, corresponding to more than one ton of 
plastic for each person alive as of the end of 2015.
Up until the 1980s, the idea of recycling plastic was unheard of. 
From the 1950s to the 1980s, plastics were either simply discarded 
into landills or incinerated. From the onset of plastic recycling in 
the 1980s to the present, the portion of plastic products that were 
recycled increased by an average of 0.7% per year.
As of the end of 2015, a staggering 55% of all plastic products 
end up in landills. This corresponds to about 4600 million tons of 
accumulated plastic waste over the years. About 700 million tons 
of plastic waste has been incinerated and about 2500 million tons 
remain in active use.
Of the entire volume of plastics that have been produced since 
the 1950s, only 500 million tons (roughly 6%) have been recycled. Of 
this portion, only 100 million tons remain in active use. The other 400 
million tons have also ended up either getting discarded in landills 
or incinerated. Around 3% of plastic waste produced annually ends 
up in oceans – or about 8 million tons by the end of 2015.
Picture 2.13 Plastic waste in the 50’s
71
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
By use, packaging of goods constitutes the greatest volume of usage 
of plastic products at around 141 million tons. The next category has 
a volume of less than half – the building and construction industry at 
only 65 million tons. This emphasizes how heavy plastic production 
can be reduced by using non-plastic alternatives for product 
packaging. Looking at the plastic production rates per country, China 
leads the pack by a huge margin at around 60 million tons. The US 
comes in at second at 38 million tons.
Source: Flyint, 2020
Now state whether the statement is true or false, and show which 
part of the text supports the statement.
1. 8 million tons of plastics end up in the ocean.
2. Each person uses tons of plastic in their lives.
3. Plastic is mostly used in China.
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 8
Work individually. Read and comprehend the following text.
Text 3
You’ve heard the saying that what one man considers to be trash can 
be another man’s treasure. This is very true and it is for this reason 
that consignment stores and pawnshops make such a roaring trade. 
If you have something in your house that is of value you will want 
to hold on to it. However, not every valuable thing remains useful 
forever, at some point you will replace this with something else. Over 
time you might ind yourself with so much stuff that is valuable but 
not useful for you. Instead of hoarding things you know longer need, 
why not clear it out. Look for a pawn shop near you to sell your stuff 
to.  
72
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Pawn shops can help you get rid of stuff or get more stuff that you 
actually need for a cheaper price. Brisbane pawnbrokers are more 
than happy to look at the stuff that you have to sell, more particularly 
the stuff that they know they can resell for a much higher price and 
make a killing like gold jewelry.
People love pawnshops because they have a wide selection of 
items. The stuff that people bring to pawn or sell ends up on the shop 
loor. Because the people who use various valuable items to pawn, 
pawn shops are very eclectic in what they can offer their customers. 
The stores cater to a variety of tastes and a variety of budgets too. 
Source: Louise, n.d.
 
 
   Picture 2.14 Selling used things
After reading the text, answer the following questions..
1. What does “what one man considers to be trash can be another 
man’s treasure” mean? ___________________________
2. What is a pawn shop? ___________________________
3. What is the purpose of the text? ___________________________
73
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Linking Related Texts
Activity 9
 
Find information about how to reuse and recycle the domestic waste 
into useful things, and write it in an infographic.
Viewing
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to suitably synthesize and 
evaluate the core and speciic information in a descriptive text.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
Do 3-2-1 strategy individually. Write your answers.
1. Write three things that you have learned in the reading section.  
 
 
 
2. Write two questions that you have in mind about the reading 
section. 
 
 
3. Write an interesting thing in the reading section. 
 
Source: Heick, n.d.
74
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Write your answer:
Write your answer:
Write your friend’s answer:
Write your friend’s answer:
Picture 2.15 Queuing at the waste bank
Picture 2.16 Weighting plastic waste
Activity 2
 Work in pair and do Pairs Compare based on the following pictures.
75
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Write your answer:
Write your answer:
Write your friend’s answer:
Write your friend’s answer:
Picture 2.17 Planning the future
Picture 2.18 Sorting out waste
76
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Modeling of Text
Activity 3
Study the meaning of the following words.
Table 2.6 Meaning of Words
Words
Meaning
toxic
Containing or being poisonous
municipal
Of or relating to the internal affairs of a major 
political unit
landills
An area built up by landill 
vehemently
Forcibly expressed
pattern
Something design or used as a model 
sole
Being the only one
haul
To move something by hauling
vast
Very great in size
Source: Merriam Webster, n.d.
Activity 4
 Work individually. Read the text carefully.
Waste Not, Want Not: “Waste Banks” in Indonesia
In Indonesia, your garbage gets mixed together with the garbage 
of millions of households, creating mountains of toxic waste too 
large to contain in municipal landills. As experts in the ield would 
argue, solid waste management is not the sole responsibility of a 
municipal government, but a collective one. As populations grow and 
consumption patterns increase, more and more solid waste is
77
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
created– and landills can only 
take so much waste! So what 
to do? The World Bank in 
Indonesia is currently exploring 
how to improve solid waste 
management, and scaling up 
‘waste banks’ is one option. 
What is a ‘waste bank’?  
Waste banks – or “bank sampah” 
as they are called in Indonesian – can be found in neighborhoods 
across Indonesia   At waste banks, the waste created by the household 
is divided into two categories – organic and non-organic. Organic 
waste gets turned into compost, while non-organic waste is divided 
further into three categories: plastic, paper, plus bottles and metal. 
The vast majority of eco-friendly households in Indonesia keep 
three bins or three large garbage bags in their homes; over time they 
began separating their waste into three different sections. Once their 
three bins and garbage bags are illed up, they bring their haul to a 
neighborhood waste bank where they then “make a deposit”.
Like a regular commercial bank, you open up an account with 
your local waste bank. Periodically, you make deposits with your 
non-organic solid waste, which are weighed and given a monetary 
value, based on rates set by waste collectors. This value is saved in 
your account from which, like a regular bank, you can withdraw. The 
basic principles of waste banks remain the same across provinces: 
collect, save, earn, change behavior, and enjoy a clean neighborhood.
Source: Salim, n.d.
Activity 5
   
Answer the following questions
1. What is the text about?
 
 
Picture 2.19 Compiling sorted waste
78
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
2. What are the three sections in the garbage’s classiication? 
 
 
3. What does paragraph two talk about?
 
 
4. What kind of value is referred to in the phrase “This value” in 
paragraph four?
 
 
5. Why is it important to set the value of the garbage by the collectors?
 
 
6. What activities can you ind in a waste bank according to the text?  
 
 
7. What would make the waste bank program a success?
 
 
8. What can you conclude after reading the text?
 
 
9. If you have an account in a waste bank. What will you do   with your 
deposit?
 
 
10. Will you create a waste bank in your neighborhood?
 
 
79
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Reading Skills
In this section of the lesson, you will learn about how to synthesize 
and evaluate information. Merriam Webster Dictionary states 
that:
1. Synthesize means the composition or combination of parts of 
an element so as to form a whole. This activity is usually done 
by restating the text with your own words.
2. Evaluate means to determine or ix the value; to determine 
the signiicance, worth or condition of something usually by 
careful appraisal. This activity is done by making inferences 
and conclusions.
In reading a text, students are often asked to answer these two 
kinds of questions. 
Source: (Merriam Webster, “Synthesis”), (Merriam Webster, “Evaluate”)
Now that you have learned how to synthesize and evaluate, write 
the things that you have to keep in mind to be able to make good 
synthesis and evaluation in the box provided. 
What Have You Learned So Far?
80
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Now, write your relection on what you have learned so far using 
the K-W-L table.
Table 2.7 K-W-L table
K : What I have 
known before 
reading 
“Waste Banks?
W : What I have 
found out after 
reading “Waste 
bank”
L : What moral 
lesson I got from 
reading “Waste 
Bank”
Source: Read Naturally, n.d.
A Mid-Lesson Relection
81
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 6
Read the following information about waste banks in Indonesia. Your 
teacher will give you further explanation on what waste banks are.
Information 1
In Manado, North Sulawesi, a local high school adopted the lessons 
of cleanliness and prudent waste management early on. Students of 
senior secondary high school SMA 7 began going green in 2007, by 
composting with organic waste from their cafeteria. Over time, 
a waste bank system was introduced, and students felt “”save up” their 
plastic water bottles and plastic snack wrappers, knowing that after a certain 
length of time they’ll have enough money to help supplement their school 
fees or other needs. Indonesia’s Ministry of Environmental Affairs has since 
awarded them for their ‘green’ entrepreneurial spirit. 
Information 2
East Kalimantan’s capital Balikpapan runs a more conventional waste 
bank.“’Garbage is our friend. Garbage equals money.’ That’s what I keep 
telling local residents,” says Sobirin, a former local legislator.  After opening 
in 2012, Sobirin’s waste bank in Gunung Samarinda  collects over 2-3 tons 
of non-organic solid waste each month.  “Each household manages to save 
about 50,000 rupiah (about $5) a month through this waste bank. Over time, 
this is quite helpful for helping pay for household and education needs.”
Information 3
Elsewhere in Sukunan, a quiet village in Yogyakarta, Central Java, Iswanto, a 
local solid waste management expert introduced “shodaqoh” waste banking. 
“Shodaqoh” refers to the Islamic concept of giving back to the community. 
Some 230 of 300 families in the village are involved in this community-
driven model, gathering 2 tons worth of non-organic solid waste a month. 
The proceeds gained from selling community waste to waste-collectors are 
then used for communal purposes, such as a playground, decided by the 
community itself.
Source: Salim, n.d.
82
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 7
 Work in groups of four. Based on the information in activity 6, do 
Jot Thoughts. Write the synthesis from each member in the table below.
Table 2.8 Member’s Ideas in Synthesizing
Member
Thoughts
Member 1
Member 2
Member 3
Member 4
83
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 8
Read the following text carefully and answer the questions.
                                   Picture 2.20 Polluted beach
Indonesia is the second-biggest marine polluter in the world. It alone 
contributes to 10% of global marine pollution. Kuta Beach is Bali’s 
most popular and most visited destination and that clearly is visible 
since there are huge mounds of garbage on the beach that are collected 
on a daily basis. Especially during the rainy season, there is garbage 
awash on the shores. Authorities declared an emergency after they 
realized the volume of plastic thrown on the beach was turning into 
an endangering tourist trade. 100 tons of junk was being cleaned by 
workers on a daily basis.
Source: Gurtoo, May 6, 2019
Based on your previous knowledge about the picture and the text, 
answer the following questions. 
1. What is the condition of the place?
 
 
84
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
2. What makes the situation occur?
 
 
3. What can we do to overcome the problem?
 
 
4. What would happen if the government put more attention to the 
condition?
 
 
 5. What are the moral values related to the condition?
 
 
Linking Related Texts
Activity 9
Reading is an important skill in English. Two of the skills in reading 
comprehension are synthesizing and evaluating.  Find more resources 
about the two skills and write your indings in the provided space.
Synthesizing
Evaluating
85
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Writing
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to produce a descriptive text 
about a place using suitable vocabulary of ive senses.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 Work in pairs, and discuss the following questions:
1. When you write a short message on whatsapp, do you pay attention 
to punctuation? Why? Why not?
2. When you write a status on your social media application, do you 
care with capitalization? Why? Why not?
Write your answers in the following table:
No.
Yes/No
Reason
1.
2.
86
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 2
 Work individually. Based on the answers in Activity 1, do you think 
punctuation and capitalization are important in writing? Why? Why 
not? Answer the question in the provided space.
Modeling of Text
Activity 3
 Work individually. Read the explanation about punctuation mark 
names, their symbols, and their functions.
Table 2.9 Explanation of punctuation
No. Punctuation
Symbol
Function
1.
period/full 
stop
.
to indicate that it is the end of a 
sentence, usually communicating a 
complete point or thought. It highlights 
a new sentence that is about to begin.
2.
comma
,
to add emphasis and tell the reader 
when to pause
3.
exclamation 
mark
!
to add emotion - whether that’s 
excitement, anger or nervousness!
4.
question 
mark
?
to indicate that the speaker is asking a 
question
5.
colon
:
to introduce a list of three or more things
6
semicolon
;
to join two main (or independent 
clauses) which have equal importance
87
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Activity 4
 Work in a group of six. One person writes one sentence of each 
punctuation mark. Number one has been done for you.
1. We need to separate organic from inorganic waste.
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Activity 5
 Work individually. Look at the following English capitalization 
rules and try to write a sentence for each rule. Number one has been 
done for you.
English Capitalization Rules:
1. Capitalize the First Word of a Sentence. 
2. Capitalize Names and Other Proper Nouns.
3. Don’t Capitalize After a Colon (Usually).
4. Capitalize the First Word of a Quote (Sometimes).
5. Capitalize Days, Months, and Holidays, But Not Seasons. 
6. Capitalize Most Words in Titles.
1.  Littering is not good.
2. 
 
88
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
 
Let’s review what you have learned in the writing section.
1. Why is using correct punctuation important? 
 
 
2. Why is using correct capitalization important?
 
 
What Have You Learned So Far?
People ignore using punctuation and capitalization because of some 
reasons (perhaps you also did it once or twice). Share your reasons 
in the following space.
A Mid-Lesson Relection
89
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 6
 Work in a group of four and do a Three-Step-Interview. Look 
at the statements in these posters. Which statement allows visitors to 
enter the area, the statement in picture A or picture B? Share your 
thoughts with the group members. Your teacher will give you further 
explanation on how to do the Three-Step-Interview step by step.
Picture A
Picture B
PRIVATE?
NO!
VISITORS 
ALLOWED
PRIVATE?
NO
VISITORS 
ALLOWED
                             Picture 2.21 Different punctuation, different meaning
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 7
 Work individually. Look at these two sentences. Are they similar in 
meaning, or different? Share your thoughts in the provided space.
1. Let’s eat grandma!
2. Let’s eat, grandma.
90
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Linking Related Texts
Activity 8
As a follow up activity, check the messages you get in your whatsapp. 
Rewrite ive short messages which ignore the use of punctuation 
or do not use them properly. Then, rewrite them again using proper 
punctuation marks. 
1. 
 
 
2. 
 
 
3. 
 
 
4. 
 
 
5. 
 
 
91
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Presenting
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to suitably present a digital or 
non-digital poster about an interesting place to visit.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
Picture 2.22 Giving a presentation
Answer the questions: 
1. How do you feel when you have to give a presentation?
 
2. What do you prepare for your presentation?
 
3. Do you know the tips on how to give a good presentation?
 
92
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Modeling of Text
Activity 2
Read the following text carefully.
Top Tips for Effective Presentations
This page draws on published advice from expert presenters around 
the world, which will help to take your presentations from merely 
‘good’ to ‘great’. There are several top tips to make good presentations.
1.   Show your passion and connect with your audience. It’s hard to 
be relaxed and be yourself when you’re nervous. Be enthusiastic 
and honest, and the audience will respond.
2. Focus on your audience’s needs. Your presentation needs to 
be built around what your audience is going to get out of the 
presentation. You need to make it easy for your audience to 
understand and respond.
3.    Keep it Simple: Concentrate on your core message. 
4.    Smile and make eye contact with your audience
5.    Start strongly. The beginning of your presentation is crucial. You 
need to grab your audience’s attention and hold it.
6.    Remember the 10-20-30 Rule for slideshows
7.    Tell Stories
8.    Use your voice effectively
9.    Use your body too
10.  Relax, breathe and enjoy
Source: Skillsyouneed. n.d
Answer the following questions. 
1. What are the tips that became your strength? 
 
 
2. What are the tips that need to be improved? 
 
 
93
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
After reading the tips, write down your next plan to improve your 
presentation skill.
What Have You Learned So Far?
After learning about the destruction of the environment around the 
world, what can you do as a member of society? Write your actions 
below.
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 3
  
 In a group of four, you will discuss a place that you think is heavily 
destroyed by irresponsible people. Use the following hints to help you 
write the text. Your teacher will help you to ind the place by giving 
some examples and descriptions.
1. What is the name of the place? 
      
2.    Where is it located?
      
3.    What is the cause of the destruction?
      
94
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
4.    What can you see in that place?
      
5.  What are the effects of the condition on the people surrounding the 
place?
      
6. What can the people do to minimize the destruction?
     
Activity 4
Based on the information you have discussed previously, create a digital 
or non digital poster.   
95
Unit 2 Love Your Environment
Activity 5
Now, explain your group’s poster to the class. Do Number Group 
Presentation. Your teacher will explain the process.
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 6
Now, create your own description of a place that is pleasant to stay 
or to visit  because of its cleanliness in a form of digital or non digital 
presentation. 
Linking Related Texts
Activity 7
Are you curious on how people can do a good presentation? How can 
they build up so much conidence? How to create such an interesting 
poster? To answer these questions, you are to visit some videos using 
the key words from the questions. You may write your indings down 
here.
96
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
An End-of-Unit Relection
What I have learned from this unit: 
The material(s) I understand the most: 
Material(s) that I want to learn more:
My opinion about this unit:
