97
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Healthy Life  
for a Healthy Future
How important is  
a healthy living?
KEMENTERIAN PENDIDIKAN, KEBUDAYAAN, RISET, DAN TEKNOLOGI
REPUBLIK INDONESIA, 2022
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Penulis: Puji Astuti, dkk.
ISBN: 978-602-427-944-8 (jil.2)
Unit
Unit 
3
Mind Mapping the Unit
Healthy Life  
for a Healthy 
Future
Unit 3
Grammar
simple present 
tense, internal 
conjunction
Writing and Presenting
producing and 
demonstrating an 
analytical exposition text
Listening  
and Speaking
identifying and using  
the expressions of 
giving and defending 
opinion
Reading  
and Viewing
1) main idea and 
author purposes 
2) detailed 
information
Pronunciation
word stress
Vocabulary
words related to 
healthy life
S+V
[a']
A
B
C
• 
Healthy life
• 
Healthy food
• 
Raw food
• 
Cooked food
• 
Diseases
• 
Sport
• 
Obesity
• 
Sentence stress 
• 
Analytical exposition
Keywords
Text type
transactional 
conversation, 
analytical 
exposition  
text
Aa
Bb
98
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
99
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Listening
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to correctly identify expressions 
of giving and defending opinion used in a spoken transactional 
conversation.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 Work in pairs through Think-Pair-Share. Look at the picture. 
What can you describe about the picture? Share your answer with your 
classmate. 
 
 
 
 
  
Picture 3.1 Eating junk food
Activity 2
 Work in pairs. Based on the picture, what will happen to the girl?
Number 1 has been done for you: 
1. She will get a stomachache.
2. 
3. 
100
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
3. 
4. 
5. 
Activity 3
 Work individually. Look at the following picture. Then, listen 
carefully to the audio to answer the questions. You can ind it through 
the link or QR code on page 266.
 
Picture 3.2 Discussion at school
Mark whether the statements are True (T) or False (F).
Number 1 has been done for you.
1. There are 3 boys and 1 girl in the conversation. (F)
2. The topic of their conversation is about Siti who looks lethargic. (   )
3. Aris advised Siti to eat healthy food. (   )
4. Ayu and Tagor share the same opinion about healthy food. (   )
5. Aris has a different opinion from Ayu and Tagor. (   )
101
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Modeling of Text
 Work Individually. Learn the examples of expressions for giving 
and defending opinions that can be used in real-life contexts.
Table 3.1 Expressions for giving and defending opinions 
Giving Opinion
I think…
I believe…
I feel…
I guess…
According to me,,,
In my view…
In my opinion..
In my eyes…
My insight…
From my point of view…
From my viewpoint…
As far as I can see…
For myself, I think….
I’d like to highlight that….
What I mean is….
Commonly, it is believed that….
Some societies
Defending Opinion
I see your awareness, but I think…
Yes, I get the point, but my belief 
is that…
That’s very interesting, but the 
tricky part is that…
I’m afraid I can’t quite come to an 
agreement with your point.
Forgive me for interrupting, but I 
must respond to that.
Hold on a moment, that’s quite 
incorrect.
If you would allow me to add a 
statement here…
If you don’t mind, I’d like to take 
issue with
Source: Chauhan, 2014
Activity 4
 Work in pairs. Listen to the audio in activity 3. Now, let’s identify 
the expressions for giving and defending opinions. Write your answers 
in the following table.
102
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Number 1 has been done for you.
No.
Giving Opinion
Defending Opinion
1.
It seems like she….
I don’t think so.
2.
3.
4.
Activity 5
 Work in pairs. Listen to the audio. You can ind it through the link 
or QR code on page 266. Fill in the blanks using the expressions of giving 
and defending opinion. Number 1 has been done for you.
 
 
 
        Picture 3.3 Discussion in the classroom
Teuku : Hi Sindi, it’s 7:30 in the morning. The class hasn’t started yet. 
What are you writing? Did you forget to do your homework?
Sindi : Of course not. I’m creating a healthy food menu that I’m going 
to eat.
Teuku : Wow, it looks interesting.
Sindi : Sure. Healthy food is essential for our bodies.
103
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Teuku : Yes, that’s right. I eat healthy food, too. What is your favorite 
food,  Sindi?.
Sindi : I love the combination of salmon and broccoli. And drink 
orange juice. What about you?
Teuku : Do you use brown rice?
Sindi : No. I don’t use brown rice. It doesn’t taste good. I don’t like 
having brown rice in my meals. 
Teuku : Do you know that brown rice is a source of complex 
carbohydrates and it’s good for your body?
Sindi : 1) But I don’t like it. I’d better have more vegetables. What 
about your healthy eating?
Teuku : 2)__________________, with fried chicken, spinach and broccoli. 
And I like to drink yogurt.
Sindi : 3)_______________________ you eat fried chicken, it is not healthy.
Teuku : Yes, 4)___________________. I eat a lot of vegetables to make them 
healthier.
Sindi : 5)______________________________. Because many other substances 
can harm your health.
Teuku : Okay, but I like it. But I’ll think about your opinion.
**The teacher arrived. All students returned to their seats.
Activity 6
 Work in pairs. The activity is Mix-Pair-Share. Your teacher will 
explain the activities. Based on the recording that you will hear, there 
are some foods that you can choose. Then, combine the foods that you 
have chosen with your partner to make healthy food  for your lunch.
Write down what you have learned so far in this lesson. Can 
you defend your opinion in a discussion? Which expressions of 
defending opinion do you often use in your daily conversation?
What Have You Learned So Far?
104
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Everyone has his/her own lifestyle. Choosing to live a healthy life 
is the right choice. As your relection, give your opinion, how we 
should live a healthy life?
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 7
 Work in groups of four. Listen to the debate 
regarding cooked versus raw food. Your teacher will 
help you and give you further explanation on the task. 
Scan the following QR Code or visit the link to watch the 
video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dNKlqljNESA.
The Video “The Debate between Cooked versus Raw Food”
Picture 3.4 Screenshot of the video “The Debate between cooked versus  
Raw Food”
Source: Good Morning America (2019)
Find 2 expressions of defending opinions.
1. 
2. 
105
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 8
 Work individually. To deepen your knowledge about the expressions 
of defending opinions that have been studied in this section, ind the 
expressions of defending opinions from the article in 
this link (The Columbus Dispatch, 2013). Then, write 
them in your notebook. Get the article by scanning 
the QR Code or going directly to: https://www.dispatch.
com/story/lifestyle/health-fitness/2013/11/18/experts-
defend-new-heart-attack/23636023007/
Linking Related Texts
 Work Individually. Find an inluencer (doctor, athlete, sport or 
healthy life enthusiast)  who shares the beneits of a healthy life, then 
observe the defending opinion of what he/she says. Write the results of 
your observation.
Speaking
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to use suitable expressions of 
giving and defending opinion in a spoken transactional conversation.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1a
 This is individual work. Carefully watch a video 
entitled Healthy Habits (Stillwater Area Public Schools, 
n.d.). Scan the QR Code or watch it directly via https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=VPHGa09cFuE. Take some 
notes when needed.
106
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 1b
 Now, work in groups of ive. Take turns telling each other about a 
particular habit that you will develop in the near future. Explain your 
choice. 
Activity 2
 This is individual work. Answer the question: What do you usually 
do in the morning? List some activities that you do and do not do in the 
morning as part of your healthy lifestyle. You might want to get ideas 
from the video you just watched. One example is given for you.
Do's
Don’ts
Drink apple juice. 
Eat chips.
Modeling of Text
Activity 3a
 
 Work individually. In Unit 1, you learned about the word stress. 
In this unit, you will learn about sentence stress. Carefully read the 
following materials.
107
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Sentence Stress
Sentence stress is the pattern of stressed and unstressed words across 
a sentence. Normally this emphasis is on words that carry important 
information, although this can change signiicantly, depending on the 
speciic meaning the speaker wants to communicate.
Example: ‘She bought a new car’ probably has the main stress on ‘car’ 
and the secondary stress on ‘bought’.
Source: British Council: TeachingEnglish, n.d.
Activity 3b
 Work in pairs. Recall the expressions you learned from the previous 
Listening Lesson. Next, in your notebook, write down ive expressions 
for stating opinion and another ive for defending opinion. Underline 
words that you think need to be stressed (because of their importance) 
when pronouncing each of the expressions. Finally, share your work 
with a classmate and ask for his/her feedback. 
Activity 3c
 Work in groups of ive. Based on what you have from Activity 3b, 
do RoundRobin to take turns stating each of the expressions with the 
correct sentence stress. 
Activity 4
 This is individual work. Select three out of ive expressions for 
stating opinion and three out of ive expressions for defending opinion 
that have from Activity 3b. You will use them in this activity. Based on 
what you have from Activity 2, prepare a one-minute speech to promote 
108
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
a healthy morning routine. The target audience is your peers. Here is a 
template that you can follow : “I believe that….(use a suitable expression 
to state your opinion)....is good for our health. Why? (give the reasons)..... 
Some people say that it is…. (a possible challenge to your opinion). 
However, …… (use a suitable expression to defend your opinion along 
with the reasons). Notes: You are free to modify the template to meet 
your creativity. Use correct sentence stress in your pronunciation  
Activity 5
 It’s time to work in pairs. It’s through RallyRobin. Preparation: 
Similar to what you did in Activity 3, prepare suitable expressions for 
stating your opinions about the morning routines you listed in Activity 
2. Prepare suitable expressions for defending them, too. 
When all is ready: State your opinions, one at a time. Next, listen to 
your partner’s challenge to the opinion (she/he tells you the weaknesses 
of your opinion). For example, she/he says: “I know that drinking 
smoothies in the morning is good but we don’t always have the time and 
ingredients ready in our kitchen.” Defend your opinion. Do the same 
thing for each of her/his opinion. Encourage each other to use suitable 
expressions and correct sentence stress throughout the RallyRobin 
process.
In the provided space, list down some of your favorite expressions 
for stating opinion and for defending your opinion.
What Have You Learned So Far?
109
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Closely read the following quote from Vincent Van Gogh, a well-
known painter: What would life be if we had no courage to attempt 
anything? Next, in your notebook, answer the question: How does 
the quote relate to the theme of this unit and the learning materials 
in this Speaking Lesson?
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 6
 Work in pairs. Closely look at the picture. Consult your teacher if 
you have any diiculties in the process.
 
    Picture 3.5 Cycling
Based on the picture, prepare your opinion regarding cycling as a 
sport. When it is ready, tell your opinion to your partner. He/she will 
challenge it especially if safety is ignored as seen in the picture. Defend 
110
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
your opinion with more reasons. Use suitable expressions and correct 
sentence stress throughout. Exchange roles and follow the same steps. 
Consult your teacher if you have any diiculties in the process.   
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 7
 Work with the same partner that you had in Activity 6. Spend 
approximately seven (7) minutes together to brainstorm issues on 
healthy lifestyle. You might want to browse the Internet or go to the 
school library to help you with the list of issues. Then, each of you picks 
one issue. Prepare yourself for stating your opinion around the issue 
of your choice along with the reasons. When you are ready, state your 
opinion to your partner. Carefully listen to her/his counter argument 
(a challenge to your opinion). Defend your opinion with reasons. Use 
suitable expressions and correct sentence stress throughout. Exchange 
roles and follow the same steps. 
Linking Related Texts
Activity 8
 
Read an article about seven healthy living blogs. Get 
the article by scanning the QR Code or going directly to: 
https://takecareof.com/articles/7-healthy-living-blogs-
you-need-to-follow-right-now. Pick one blog that you 
think is the best. List down your reasons. Next, turn 
to a classmate and tell her/him your choice along with 
the reasons. Be ready to defend your choice in case she/he disagrees. 
Note: You might also want to record yourself explaining your choice 
and upload the video on your social media.
111
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Reading
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to correctly identify the main 
ideas and author’s purpose in an analytical exposition text.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 Work in groups of four. Look at the following picture, and answer 
this question, “What does the statement mean?”
 
 
 
    Picture 3.6 Wise word about healthy life
Activity 2
 Work individually. In order to help you to understand the text, let’s 
learn the vocabulary that you will ind in it.
Calories
A unit equivalent to the large calorie expressing 
heat-producing or energy-producing value in food 
when oxidized in the body
112
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Heart Attacks
An acute episode of coronary heart disease marked 
by the death or damage of heart muscle due to 
insuicient blood supply to the heart usually as a 
result of a coronary artery becoming blocked by a
blood clot formed in response to a ruptured or torn 
fatty arterial deposit.
Strokes
A sudden change in the blood supply to a part of 
the brain, sometimes causing a loss of the ability to 
move particular parts of the body.
Healthy Life
Beneicial to one's physical, mental, or emotional 
state : conducive to or associated with good health 
or reduced risk of disease.
workout
A practice or exercise to test or improve one's itness 
for athletic competition, ability, or performance.
Source: Merriam Webster, n.d.; Cambridge Dictionary, n.d.
Read the following text comprehensively.
The Easiest Way to Stay Healthy
In this era, healthy life is 
expected 
as 
something 
that is expensive. It is 
not 
totally 
wrong 
but 
isn’t totally right, there 
is inexpensive activity to 
get a healthy life. That is 
jogging. Jogging is a sport 
that 
everyone 
can 
do 
because this sport does 
not require a lot of costs to 
carry out but is as good as other sports that require high prices for the 
health of our bodies. Jogging is an excellent sport for everyone. You 
can go jogging anytime and anywhere and also you can either do it 
alone or with your friends.
Picture 3.7 A family is jogging.
113
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
On average, jogging burns about 100 calories every mile, but 
it depends on your weight and the intensity of your workout. For 
example, a man weighing 68 kg can burn 600 calories per 10 km. 
Then, jogging can keep your cardiovascular (heart pumping) in good 
condition. Moreover, you will also avoid heart attacks and strokes if 
you do it regularly.
Besides being good for health, jogging is also perfect for mental 
health. Every time you inish jogging, you will feel refreshed. Several 
studies revealed that people who like jogging will tend to have a 
better outlook on life and make them happier than people in general.
Those reasons above should make us realize and keep maintaining 
our health with the easiest and lowest cost of exercises, jogging. Thus, 
there should be no excuses not to exercise, because we know the 
beneits of exercise besides eating healthy food. Therefore, by taking 
a little time to jog, it means that we love our lives more.
Source: British Course, n.d.
Activity 3
 Work In pairs, ind the meaning of the following vocabularies. If 
you have diiculty, you can consult your dictionary. 
Number 1 has been done for you.
No.
Word
Meaning
1.
Burn
Reduce calories
2.
Weight
3.
Intensity
4.
Cardiovascular
5.
Stroke
114
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Check your comprehension. Answer the following questions.
Number 1 has been done for you.
1. Why is jogging the easiest sport for everyone?Because this sport 
does not require a lot of costs to carry out.
2. What is the good side of jogging? 
3. Is jogging not correlated with mental health? 
4. Why do several studies suggest people jogging as their sport? 
5. Do all people burn about 100 calories every mile? 
Modeling of Text
Activity 4
 Work individually. Learn the materials about analytical exposition 
text below.
The previous text entitled “The easiest way to stay healthy” is an 
analytical exposition text. The purpose of the analytical exposition text 
is to convince the reader that the topic presented is an important topic 
to discuss or to get attention by providing arguments or opinions that 
support the main idea or topic.
The structure of the analytical exposition text consists of three main 
parts, namely: thesis, argument, and reiteration. The following table 
will explain the structure of the analytical exposition text. 
Table 3.2 The structure of the analytical exposition text. 
Structure
Text
Thesis:
In this era, healthy life is expected as something that is 
expensive. It is not totally wrong but isn't totally right, 
there is inexpensive activity to get a healthy life. That is 
jogging. Jogging is a sport that everyone can do because 
this sport does not require a lot of costs to carry out but 
is as good as other sports that require high prices for 
the health of our bodies. Jogging is an excellent sport 
for everyone. You can go jogging anytime and 
115
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
anywhere and also you can either do it alone or with 
your friends. 
Argument 1
On average, jogging burns about 100 calories every 
mile, but it depends on your weight and the intensity 
of your workout. 
For example, a man weighing 68 kg can burn 600 
calories per 10 km. 
Then, jogging can keep your cardiovascular (heart 
pumping) in good condition. 
Moreover, you will also avoid heart attacks and strokes 
if you do it regularly.
Argument 2
Besides being good for health, jogging is also perfect 
for mental health. 
Every time you inish jogging, you will feel refreshed. 
Several studies revealed that people who like jogging 
will tend to have a better outlook on life and make 
them happier than people in general.
Reiteration
Those reasons above should make us realize and keep 
maintaining our health with the easiest and lowest 
cost of exercises, jogging. Thus, there should be no 
excuses not to exercise, because we know the beneits 
of exercise besides eating healthy food. Therefore, by 
taking a little time to jog, it means that we love our 
lives more.
The following explanation deals with how to ind the main idea of the 
text.
Before you read:
● 
Read the title
● 
What is the text about?
● 
What is the topic?
During the reading;
● 
Looking for and carefully reading text features
● 
Is the text iction non-iction
● 
Look for information, words, and pictures that are repeated
116
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
After you read:
● 
Think about the most important point about the topic
● 
What details or examples backup and support the main idea?
Source: Literacy Ideas, n.d.
Activity 5
 Work in pairs. Do Think-Pair-Share. You have studied the structure 
of the analytical exposition text. Read the text about “The Importance of 
Sleep for Health” to answer the questions given.
The Importance of Sleep for Health
Picture 3.8 Doctor and patient
Sleep plays a vital role in good health and well-being for the rest of your 
life. Adequate quality sleep at the right time can help to protect your 
mental health, quality of life, physical health, and safety. Why is sleep 
so important? Sleep can help your brain work properly. When you 
sleep, your brain prepares to run the next day. This will undoubtedly 
form a new path to help you learn and remember information.
Studies suggest that a good night’s sleep can improve learning. 
Whether you’re learning how to play the piano, do the math, play 
golf, or drive a car, sleep will help you improve your learning and 
problem-solving skills. Sleep will also help you make decisions, pay 
attention, and be creative.
117
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Physical health is often also related to the quality of sleep. That’s 
why sleep plays a vital role in your physical health. For example, rest 
is involved in healing and repairing your heart and blood vessels. 
Sustained sleep deprivation is associated with an increased risk 
of kidney disease, heart disease, high blood pressure, stroke, and 
diabetes. Sleep can also help maintain a healthy balance of hormones 
that make you feel hungry (ghrelin)/full (leptin). When you don’t get 
enough sleep, your ghrelin level will go up, and your leptin level will 
drop. That will make you feel more hungry than when you get enough 
rest.
Those beneits of the importance of sleep for health are presented. 
There are a lot of beneits of sleep to get better health, not only 
physically but also mentally. That’s why sleep is the activity that we 
should be concerned about for getting a healthy life.
Source: English Admin, n.d.
1. What is the author’s purpose in writing this text? 
2. What is the main idea of the text?
3. Give another opinion about the importance of sleep for a healthy life?
4. What would you say, if your friend told you that sleep is not 
important?        
Activity 6
 Work in pairs. Read and discuss the text, then correct the following 
sentence.
Number 1 has been done for you.
1. There is no correlation between sleep and physical health.
 
There is a correlation between sleep and physical health.
2. A good nap without sleep at night can improve learning and problem 
solving.
 
 
118
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
3. You feel excited when you have a lack of sleep.
 
 
4. When you sleep, your brain stops working.
 
 
5. When you get enough sleep, your leptin level will drop.
 
 
Activity 7
 Work individually. Reread “The Importance of Sleep for Health” 
text,  ind the word in italic, then, match each word with its meaning. 
Number 1 has been done for you.
Mental Health
Diabetes
Problem-Solving Skill
Ghrelin level
Sleep deprivation
1
2
3
4
5
A disease that occurs when your 
blood sugar, is too high.
A hormone produced in your gut. It 
is often referred to as the “hunger 
hormone”.
A person's overall emotional and 
psychological condition.
The condition of forcibly being kept 
awake, to the point of noticeably 
lower alertness.
Soft Skill which help you solve 
issues quickly and effectively.
119
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
In the box provided, write down what you have learned so far in 
this lesson. When you read the text, how do you ind the main idea?
What Have You Learned So Far?
Work in pairs through Time-Pair-Share.  Now you realize a healthy 
life. Do you choose eating healthy food or doing healthy activity? 
Discuss your opinion with your partner. 
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 8
 Work in a group of four. Read the text about “The problem of being 
too fat” and answer the questions. Your teacher will give you further 
explanation on how to answer the questions.
The Problem of being too Fat
Obesity is a situation where humans are too fat. This condition is 
deined because there is too much fat in the body. Being overweight 
has the potential to cause a high risk of health problems.
120
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Being too fat is one of the main factors for heart disease. Because 
of being overweight, the heart will work harder than usual. This can 
cause a heart attack. In addition, obesity can raise blood cholesterol 
and blood pressure. And being too fat can increase the amount of 
sugar in the blood. This will lead to diabetes and other serious diseases.
In addition, being too fat is often avoided by many men and women. 
This is because being too fat will interfere with their appearance. 
Further studies are needed to look at other effects of obesity.
From those statements, we could clearly understand that being 
overweight is dangerous for our life both appearance and serious 
disease.
Sumber: English Admin, 2013
1. Identify the main idea of each paragraph.
Paragraph 1: 
Paragraph 2: 
Paragraph 3: 
Paragraph 4: 
2. What is the author’s purpose in this text?
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 9
 Work individually. Read the following article, then, ind the main 
idea of the text and state what is the author’s purpose in writing the 
article.
The Beneits of  Vegetables
Vegetables prevent unwanted signs of aging and keep skin young. 
Choose brightly colored red and orange vegetables and you’ll get an 
added boost of beta carotene, which can give you a healthy glow as
121
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
it protects skin from sun damage. Similarly, lycopene, found in red 
vegetables such as tomatoes, also has been shown to act as a natural 
sunscreen.
Meanwhile, nutrients like magnesium and vitamin C are quickly 
depleted during stressful times. Luckily, many vegetables contain 
these very nutrients, as well as tension-reducing omega-3 fatty acids 
and B vitamins that ight anxiety and depression.
Some vegetables also have these same nutrients in addition 
to bone-building vitamin K, magnesium, potassium and prebiotic 
iber. Eat strong-spined, dark leafy greens like collard greens, turnip 
greens, kale, spinach (cooked for more calcium!), broccoli and green 
peas for calcium and vitamin K. Mushrooms contain vitamin D while 
asparagus, chard, kale, artichokes, onions, garlic and leeks are full of 
prebiotic iber.  
Source: Oktashare (2018)
Linking Related Texts
Find an article about the importance of doing sport for our health. Then, 
identify the main idea and the author’s purposes.
Viewing
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to suitably synthesize and 
evaluate detailed information in a multimodal analytical exposition 
text.
 
122
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 Work in pairs. Do Think-Pair-Share. Look at the following picture, 
and answer this question, “What does the statement mean?”
Picture 3.9 The Importance of 
consuming fruit
 
 
 
 
Activity 2
 Work in a group of four. Do Three-Step-Interview. Look at the 
following picture about times to eat fruits. Ask your friend whether he/
she eats fruits at the best time, good time, or wrong time. You can also 
ask what fruits they eat the most and why.
Early Morning in an Empty Stomach
An Hour Before Breakfast, Lunch, Dinner
Immediately Before Bed
Eating Fruits After Meal
Picture 3.10 Fruit habit consumption
123
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Modeling of Text
Activity 3
 Work individually. Watch the video about the 
explanation of analytical exposition text that your 
teacher will play. Scan the following QR Code or visit 
the link to watch the video: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=Q3MbhERPEeM. Then, write down three 
important pieces of information about analyzing and 
synthesizing the text that you get from the video.
1. 
2. 
3. 
Activity 4
 Work in pairs. Compare your answers in Activity 3 with your 
friend’s answers. Discuss further why argument should be based on fact, 
not opinion. From the result of your discussion, design an infographic 
that shows the important information about analytical exposition text.
After learning and understanding about analytical exposition text, 
when do you think this type of text will be appropriately used, and 
why? Write your answer in the provided space.
What Have You Learned So Far?
124
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Having learned that fruits are needed by our body, how will you 
suggest other people to eat fruits in the best time? What way will 
you use so that people will not be offended by your suggestion?
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 5
 Work in pairs. Look at the following picture about different fruits 
from Indonesia. If you do not know some of them. Ask your partner or 
ind the information from the Internet.Then discuss the nutrition each 
fruit has. If a foreign friend wants to buy one of the fruits, which one 
will you suggest him/her to buy as the most nutritious one and why? 
Write the thesis and your arguments. Your teacher will give you further 
explanation on how to write thesis and arguments.
 
 
Picture 3.11 Local fruits
125
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 6
 Work individually. Look at the following picture about different 
fruits commonly eaten. Then list the names of the fruits from the more 
nutritious to the less nutritious based on the data that you get from the 
Internet. Write the thesis and your arguments about each fruit.
 
 
Picture 3.12 Common fruits
Linking Related Texts
 Work individually. Some people like to eat raw vegetables and 
some others like to cook them before eating. Find a text that discusses 
the beneits of eating raw vegetables and cooked vegetables for our 
body. Then draw a mind map that shows your understanding about it. 
Don’t forget to mention your thesis and argument.
126
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Writing
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to produce an analytical 
exposition text about healthy life using suitable conjunctions.
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
 Work in pairs through Think-pair-Share. Watch 
the following video and answer the question based 
on the video. Scan the following QR Code or visit the 
link to watch the video: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=YXynlliFyC8.
 
 
Picture 3.13 Screenshot of the video Health Hazards of Junk Food – The Doctors
 
 
Source: The Doctors, 2017
What speciic information can you get from the video?
127
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Activity 2
 Work in Pairs. Based on the video you have watched, make a 
graphic organizer of the important information from the video. You can 
create a graphic organizer as you like.
Modeling of Text
 Work individually. Learn the language features of analytical 
exposition text below.
You already know that the purpose of an analytical exposition text 
is to convince the reader that the topic presented is an important topic 
to discuss. You have also studied the structure of analytical exposition 
text which consists of thesis, argument, and reiteration. 
Now let’s discuss the language features commonly used in analytical 
exposition texts.
Using simple present tense: 
● 
She eats bananas every day.
● 
Juli and Rian do not like jogging in the stadium.
Using words that express the author’s thoughts or feelings: experience, 
feel, know, realize, sense, think, etc.
Using conjunction
● 
Internal conjunction: 
 Addition: besides, in addition, further.
 Comparisons: vice versa, meanwhile, but, on the other hand.
 Time: next, then, second, third.
 Cause effect: the result, so, consequence, as a result.
● 
Causal Conjunction: because, despite, due to, as a result, for that 
reason, by, consequently.
Source: D’Eletto, 2021; Chairulzami, 2020
128
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 3
 Work individually. Find the mistakes in the use of simple present 
tense. Then, correct them.
1. Siti seldom eat healthy foods.
2. Bob and Dini does not like to eat fried chicken.
3. Nina and Bani learns how to live a healthy life.
4. Aris eat bananas almost everyday.
5. Nindy do not like to eat ish.
Answers: number 1 has been done for you.
1. eat 
 
Siti seldom eats healthy foods. 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
Activity 4
 Work individually. Match these sentences using the correct 
conjunctions, so it becomes the complete sentence.
(1) even though   (2) so   (3) and   (4) because   (5) for that reason
fried chicken is delicious food
he is very healthy
you have to eat more vegetables
it is not healthy 
he looks so fresh 
he always exercises  
she likes exercises such as running swimming 
he never miss one meeting for gym your body is  getting healthier 
129
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Answers: number 1 has been done for you.
1. Fried chicken is delicious even though it is not healthy.
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
After you learn about analytical exposition text along with its 
structure and its language features, write 3 sentences using simple 
present tense.
What Have You Learned So Far?
In this unit you have read several examples of analytical exposition 
texts related to healthy life. In your opinion,what activities can be 
done to make our lives healthy besides eating healthy food and 
exercising?
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 5
Picture 3.14 Graphic organizer  
about healthy life
 Work in groups of four. 
Look at the following graphic 
organizer about healthy life.
Discuss the graphic organizer 
using Talking Chip technique, 
then make your own graphic 
organizer about healthy and 
unhealthy food.
130
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 6
a. Based on the graphic organizer that you have created, develop it 
into a draft of analytical exposition text by using text structures and 
appropriate language features.
b. After inishing your irst draft, ask other groups and your teacher to 
check and provide suggestions on your draft, vice versa, your group 
will check the draft of other groups and give input on their draft.
c. 
After getting input from other groups and also your teacher, revise 
your irst draft then rewrite it as your second draft. Ask for feedback 
from your teacher. Activities are carried out until your draft is 
perfect.
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 7
 Work individually. Create a graphic organizer from the following 
picture. Then write an analytical exposition text based on the graphic 
organizer that you have created.  
Picture 3.15 Gardening
131
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
Linking Related Texts
 Work individually. Find healthy tips and tricks on the Internet. 
Write an analytical exposition text of healthy life using the tips and 
tricks that you ind on the internet.
Presenting
Learning Objective:
By the end of this lesson, you are able to actively demonstrate an 
analytical exposition text through a group debate.
 
Building Knowledge of the Field
Activity 1
Picture 3.16 Speech Performance
132
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Watch a video about why junk food should be banned. 
Scan the following QR Code or visit the link to watch 
the video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4S-uRgt_1aI
Activity 2
 Work in groups of three. Write the reasons you get from the 
video and share your group’s ideas with others.
Ideas from the video
Ideas from the group
Modeling of Text
Activity 3
Read the following text on how to conduct a good debate.
Debating Rules
Now that you know the rules for debating, you need to learn also 
about what debate is because debating is a kind of presenting ideas 
in front of the public.
A debate is an organized argument or contest of ideas in which 
the participants discuss a topic from two opposing sides. Those who 
agree with this statement or idea are the “Pro” side.  Those who will 
not agree with this statement or idea are the “Con” side.  Each side 
will show in an organized and clever way why they believe to have 
the right answers.  They will use examples and evidence to support 
their ideas while working towards a conclusion. 
133
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
The aim of a debate is to convince the opposition that you are 
right. When the two sides agree on the subject or when one side’s 
arguments are more convincing than the other side, that is when the 
debate comes to a close. In a formal debate, a mediator (a person that 
has not agreed with the Pro or the Con) will decide who the winner 
should be. In an informal debate the argument can continue until the 
time when one side gives up.
Source: American Debate League, n.d.
Activity 4
 Work in pairs and answer the following questions.
1. Which one is more diicult, an individual presentation or a debate? 
Explain your reasons.
 
 
2. How do you construct arguments to support your ideas?
 
 
3. What kind of conclusion is more effective, a recommendation or a 
reiteration? Explain.
 
 
Based on your understanding on the concept of debating, answer 
the question below.
Do you prefer the government or the opposition side? Explain.
What Have You Learned So Far?
134
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Debating is an interesting yet challenging activity in presenting 
ideas. What should you do to win your debate?
A Mid-Lesson Relection
Joint Construction of Text
Activity 5
Read the text below as the topic for the debate. After that, your teacher 
will decide which group you belong to, the government or the opposing 
side. After that, the representatives of both groups will decide the 
motion that  will be delivered during the debate.
Pros and Cons: Should Junk Food Be Banned or  
Allowed in Schools?
Even though people realize junk food is not a healthy option that does 
not deter them from consuming a variety of greasy fast foods. Even 
worse, it is given to children at school. In some parts of the world, 
some parents actually pack junk or fast food in their children’s lunch 
box to have as a meal or snack in school. We have to admit junk food, 
processed food, and fast foods have become unavoidable parts of our 
lives. But should they really be the only options for school kids?
There are advantages and disadvantages associated with junk 
food in school. Do the pros outweigh the cons? Find out in the lines 
below.
5 reasons junk food should be allowed in school: Pros.
1. Because it is important for children to eat something.
2. Junk food is easier and cheaper.
135
Unit 3 Healthy Life  for a Healthy Future
3. Vending machines are proitable for schools
4. Healthy ingredients can eliminate junk food.
5. There should be a freedom of choice for kids in school.
5 reasons junk food should be banned in school: Cons.
1. Junk food leads to obesity.
2. Children get habituated to unhealthy eating.
3. Junk-food eaters have a high risk of acquiring diabetes in 
adulthood.
4. Junk-food eaters risk damage to the heart and liver.
5. Regular consumption of junk food causes gastric problems.
Source: Pereira, n.d.
The intention of the debate above is to bring awareness to the 
advantages and disadvantages of junk food for children in schools.
Activity 6
Now that you are in your group, discuss more ideas and arguments to 
support your point. 
Perform a debate in front of the class. Do not forget to create a poster 
containing the important ideas.
Independent Construction of Text
Activity 7
Watch the following video before you prepare your 
presentation. The video is about the Food Pyramid. 
Scan the following QR Code or visit the link to watch 
the video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1iLwRB-
Rc7o
136
Bahasa Inggris: English for Change untuk SMA/MA Kelas XI
Activity 8
 Work individually. Create a digital or non digital poster of a healthy 
lifestyle. After that, present it in front of the class. Based on the video, 
you may either choose the government or the opposition side.
Linking Related Texts
Activity 9
 Work  individually, ind other resources of information about how 
to keep a healthy lifestyle. Write your answer below.
Source of information: 
Information: 
An End-of-Unit Relection
What I have learned from this unit: 
The material(s) I understand the most: 
Material(s) that I want to learn more:
My opinion about this unit:
